[Amit Varma]: You're listening to the first episode of 2021 and a horrible year is behind us.
[Amit Varma]: It's safe to say that 2020 changed the way we live our lives forever.
[Amit Varma]: It changed the way we work.
[Amit Varma]: It changed the way we spend our time.
[Amit Varma]: It changed the way we relate to other people.
[Amit Varma]: Most of all, it forced all of us to spend more time with ourselves and perhaps re-examine
[Amit Varma]: what our priorities are.
[Amit Varma]: There are many lessons we can draw from 2020 and this episode is about some of them.
[Amit Varma]: But the most important one and perhaps the most obvious one is this, do not take anything
[Amit Varma]: for granted.
[Amit Varma]: Cherish all that is good in your life and don't be too disheartened by all the bad things
[Amit Varma]: that happen.
[Amit Varma]: This too shall end.
[Amit Varma]: No matter how 2020 was for you, I hope 2021 will bring you happiness.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to spend this first episode of 2021 taking stock of what we learned in 2020.
[Amit Varma]: To this effect, I invited my friends Shruti Rajgopalan and Alex Tabarrok onto the show.
[Amit Varma]: They have both been frequent guests before on the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti is a constitutional economist who works for the Mercatus Center and Alex is an economist
[Amit Varma]: who is one of the two co-authors of the best blog in the world, Marginal Revolution.
[Amit Varma]: He is also one of the brains behind the incredible Marginal Revolution University.
[Amit Varma]: Here's how we structured this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, Alex, and I each came prepared with a list of five lessons we think 2020 held
[Amit Varma]: for us.
[Amit Varma]: And during our free-flowing conversation, we actually came up with even more lessons
[Amit Varma]: than the 15 you would expect.
[Amit Varma]: You may not agree with us on all of these, but our aim was to be thought-provoking and
[Amit Varma]: everything Shruti and Alex said certainly gave me ideas to process and mull over.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to the conversation, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: It's no surprise that over the 206 episodes of the seen and the unseen, I've had many
[Amit Varma]: economists on the show, even when we are not talking about economics.
[Amit Varma]: That's because, as I keep saying, economics is the study of human behavior, the tools
[Amit Varma]: of economics can help us understand the world better, and even live our lives better.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd like to introduce you today to a new podcast that I've been following.
[Amit Varma]: Think Like an Economist is a podcast hosted by the famous economists, Betsy Stevenson
[Amit Varma]: and Justin Wolfers.
[Amit Varma]: In small bite-sized episodes of less than 20 minutes, they shed light on a number of
[Amit Varma]: fascinating subjects.
[Amit Varma]: For example, how can we live our lives without regrets?
[Amit Varma]: Why the best drummer in a band should not necessarily be the guy doing the drumming?
[Amit Varma]: Think of Paul McCartney and the Beatles.
[Amit Varma]: Why it may often be difficult to forgive, but it is rational to do so.
[Amit Varma]: Stevenson and Wolfers will be joined by guests like Janet Yellen of Federal Reserve fame
[Amit Varma]: and two-time Basia Prize winner Tim Harford.
[Amit Varma]: Think Like an Economist is available on all podcast apps.
[Amit Varma]: And you can also go over to himalaya.com slash econ and enter the bonus code econ for a free
[Amit Varma]: trial of some of the podcast premium features.
[Amit Varma]: I'll put that link in the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And I have to say I love the name of the show because it's what I try to do so often.
[Amit Varma]: Think Like an Economist.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti and Alex, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest 2]: Hi, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: It's good to be here.
[Amit Varma]: We are recording this towards the end of December.
[Amit Varma]: It's been quite a crazy year.
[Amit Varma]: We actually all of us recorded in the same room when I was visiting Delhi and you guys
[Amit Varma]: were also there earlier this year.
[Amit Varma]: And that seems so long away.
[Amit Varma]: It seems like a different world and time.
[Amit Varma]: So how have your years been, Shruti?
[Amit Varma]: You go first.
[Guest 2]: Given the circumstances, surprisingly good.
[Guest 2]: You know, I mean, in the sense I have a job and we've been healthy, we've been able to
[Guest 2]: socially distance and shelter in place.
[Guest 2]: I have a kind of job that, you know, you can just immediately do from home seamlessly,
[Guest 2]: right?
[Guest 2]: The technology helps.
[Guest 2]: If this had happened even 10, 12 years ago, I don't think I would have had access to broadband
[Guest 2]: and online libraries and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: So given the circumstances, surprisingly good.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, that's true for me as well.
[Guest 1]: A little bit embarrassed to say because things have been going well, given what a terrible
[Guest 1]: situation so many other people are in.
[Guest 1]: You know, I was teaching online to begin with.
[Guest 1]: So that has not disrupted my life too much.
[Guest 1]: And I found myself kind of, oddly, I was asked to speak to the White House and to the Council
[Guest 1]: of Economic Advisers to give them some advice on prizes.
[Guest 1]: And I went to that talk, and it turned out to be me and Nobel Prize winner Michael Kramer
[Guest 1]: talking to them.
[Guest 1]: So we gave them some advice, and I was very sort of forthright and forceful, and Michael
[Guest 1]: Kramer was more reserved and conservative, but that turned out to be a good team.
[Guest 1]: And they asked us to start writing some reports for them, and Michael Kramer then pulled out
[Guest 1]: his Rolodex and started calling all of his friends, like Susan Athey and Chris Snyder,
[Guest 1]: all these top-notch economists all around the world to start writing and advising governments.
[Guest 1]: So I found myself unexpectedly on this team, and it's been very intellectually stimulating
[Guest 1]: for me.
[Guest 1]: Again, I sort of hate to say that because so many other people, you know, it's been
[Guest 1]: a terrible, terrible year, but at least intellectually, it's been stimulating for me.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: That sounds like a much more impactful year than I think many others have had, certainly
[Amit Varma]: me.
[Amit Varma]: We know the kind of theme of the episode, five lessons from 2020, and at least as far
[Amit Varma]: as, you know, my lessons are concerned, there are more things that I have had reason to
[Amit Varma]: think about, you know, through the course of the year and not necessarily something
[Amit Varma]: that wasn't true earlier or something that, you know, suddenly came to light in 2020 itself,
[Amit Varma]: but just circumstances make you think about different things in particular ways.
[Amit Varma]: So all my listeners, how we're going to do this is each of us have prepared five lessons
[Amit Varma]: that 2020 holds for us in general.
[Amit Varma]: These are our personal takes, and we'll go one by one in the sense, you know, first Alex
[Amit Varma]: and Shruti, then me and rinse and repeat four more times.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, and if you're still with us, we'll have 15 such lessons.
[Amit Varma]: So Alex, you know, because you joined the session last, it has been decided by those
[Amit Varma]: who were here before you that you are first to go.
[Guest 1]: Okay.
[Guest 1]: So let me start with a bit of philosophy, and that is the omission-commission distinction.
[Guest 1]: I think this needs to be destroyed because it's killing people.
[Guest 1]: It's killing people.
[Guest 1]: So what is the omission-commission distinction?
[Guest 1]: This is basically the idea that killing somebody is worse than letting them die, right?
[Guest 1]: Which kind of has some sense in some circumstances, but it's been overgeneralized, and I think
[Guest 1]: it's creating a huge amount of problems.
[Guest 1]: One of the first studies of this actually sort of accidentally, but good for our purposes,
[Guest 1]: was on vaccines.
[Guest 1]: So if you ask people, suppose there's some disease which kills, you know, 10 out of every
[Guest 1]: hundred thousand people, and then there's a vaccine, and the vaccine can also have some
[Guest 1]: side effects.
[Guest 1]: It could also hurt people.
[Guest 1]: That is the minimum, you know, death rate which you would accept to take the vaccine,
[Guest 1]: right?
[Guest 1]: So the disease kills 10 out of every hundred thousand.
[Guest 1]: People are still not willing to take the vaccine even when it's like 2 out of 100,000, you
[Guest 1]: know?
[Guest 1]: They are much, much more hesitant to take the vaccine even when it has a lower death
[Guest 1]: rate.
[Guest 1]: And kind of the reason for that seems to be that if you choose the vaccine and your child
[Guest 1]: or you or your spouse die, then you cause the death, right?
[Guest 1]: It's sort of your fault.
[Guest 1]: That's how people think about this.
[Guest 1]: On the other hand, if you choose not to take the vaccine and you die from the disease,
[Guest 1]: well, that was just bad luck.
[Guest 1]: I mean, that's not your fault.
[Guest 1]: You didn't make a decision.
[Guest 1]: Of course, this is crazy, right?
[Guest 1]: And this is a very bad kind of decision-making, right?
[Guest 1]: To me, as a sort of consequentialist, utilitarian, cost-benefit economist, I'm going to say,
[Guest 1]: look, take the vaccine so long as the death rate is less than 9, you know, less than 10
[Guest 1]: out of every 100,000.
[Guest 1]: You're better off.
[Guest 1]: Just do the thing which makes you better off.
[Guest 1]: And yet people don't do this.
[Guest 1]: And we've seen this error apply not just to ordinary people who, you know, maybe, you
[Guest 1]: know, they make mistakes or they're low educated.
[Guest 1]: I don't actually think this is true, but you might think that, oh, maybe it's just people
[Guest 1]: of low education make this mistake.
[Guest 1]: No, our leaders make this mistake time and time again.
[Guest 1]: So for example, we could have done challenge trials for a vaccine.
[Guest 1]: So a challenge trial, as you probably know, is where you take a small group of people
[Guest 1]: and some of them you give the vaccine, some of them you don't, and then you deliberately
[Guest 1]: expose them all to the virus.
[Guest 1]: The virtue of a challenge trial is with only about 100 people, you can very, very quickly
[Guest 1]: find out whether the vaccine is working.
[Guest 1]: Now we didn't do that.
[Guest 1]: Why not?
[Guest 1]: Because, well, if to do that, we have to expose people, we have somebody might die.
[Guest 1]: Even though there were institutions like One Day Sooner who had got tens of thousands of
[Guest 1]: people willing to do a challenge trial, nobody did one.
[Guest 1]: So instead, what did we do?
[Guest 1]: Well, we did a randomized controlled trial, which is good.
[Guest 1]: But look, what we did, Pfizer and Moderna and so forth, they got 40,000 people, much
[Guest 1]: bigger sample, gave half of them, gave 20,000 people the vaccine.
[Guest 1]: And then he said, oh, just go off and do your thing, right?
[Guest 1]: Just behave normally.
[Guest 1]: And then what they found, of course, is the vaccine was highly effective.
[Guest 1]: But look, 20,000 people were doing their own thing, and some of them got the virus.
[Guest 1]: Some of them got COVID, right?
[Guest 1]: So the omission-commission distinction, again, came here because we weren't willing to do
[Guest 1]: the thing which was cheap and quick and fast because, oh, you've got to give them the virus.
[Guest 1]: You're doing something bad.
[Guest 1]: On the other hand, doing a randomized controlled trial in which 20,000 people were left exposed
[Guest 1]: to get COVID, and a bunch of them did get COVID, well, that's okay because we're not
[Guest 1]: causing them.
[Guest 1]: That's an error of omission.
[Guest 1]: We're not helping them, but we're not stopping them, you know, and we're not requiring them
[Guest 1]: to get the virus.
[Guest 1]: So again, this was just kind of crazy, I think, that we didn't do the sensible thing.
[Guest 1]: And we saw this again and again.
[Guest 1]: So it's very surprising.
[Guest 1]: The military, right?
[Guest 1]: Like the military, you would think that the military would be among the first people to
[Guest 1]: sort of volunteer for things like this.
[Guest 1]: But no, we couldn't do that.
[Guest 1]: And again, when it comes to FDA approval, right, there's a very big asymmetry.
[Guest 1]: We think that the disease, that's rampant, you know, right now, three and a half thousand
[Guest 1]: people a day are dying in the United States.
[Guest 1]: That's rampant.
[Guest 1]: But we couldn't possibly approve a vaccine early.
[Guest 1]: We have to do, you know, the FDA kept reassuring us.
[Guest 1]: We're not cutting corners.
[Guest 1]: Well, wait a second.
[Guest 1]: There's a virus out there.
[Guest 1]: There's a pandemic.
[Guest 1]: Surely, there is a time in which you should be cutting corners, right?
[Guest 1]: I mean, I mean, you know, there is a time and place for going slow, but there's also
[Guest 1]: a time and place for cutting corners.
[Guest 1]: That's how you get there fast.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: That's you're on the racetrack.
[Guest 1]: You're supposed to cut the corner.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: But yet, you know, we had to reassure, oh, we can't be doing anything unsafe.
[Guest 1]: And again, that seems crazy.
[Guest 2]: So that's my lesson.
[Guest 2]: It's almost like the seen and the unseen, right?
[Guest 2]: Like, that's exactly what it is, right?
[Guest 2]: We see certain types of deaths and we ignore other types of deaths.
[Guest 2]: And I think the larger lesson of what Alex is saying, I think it goes beyond the pandemic.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: It goes to all sorts of clinical trials like, you know, it takes like eight years and a
[Guest 2]: billion dollars to get any new breakthrough through the FDA.
[Guest 2]: So no wonder we don't have more, you know, life saving medication and vaccines, you know,
[Guest 2]: available to poorer countries and things like that, because it's just so damn expensive
[Guest 2]: to get these through the door in the developed world.
[Guest 2]: And the other part also is like this bizarre misplaced sense of equity, like this one version
[Guest 2]: of equity, which is only parentalism or, you know, some kind of paternalism where apparently
[Guest 2]: people are not smart enough to take the risks that they wish to take.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: Some of the vaccine trials are lower risk than getting on a skateboard, right, or bungee
[Guest 2]: jumping or getting on a motorcycle.
[Guest 2]: And we let people do that all the time.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: So there's this very misplaced sense of, oh, of course, they're willing to take the risk,
[Guest 2]: but they don't know better.
[Guest 2]: That's why they're willing to take the risk.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: They are too poor.
[Guest 2]: And that's why they are forced to take the risk.
[Guest 2]: You know, something like that.
[Guest 2]: Like the moment you would say something about maybe the military should do this, they'd
[Guest 2]: start talking about, you know, how there are more people from lower income families who
[Guest 2]: join the military.
[Guest 2]: And it's inherently unfair.
[Guest 2]: And I'm sure there are a lot of people from poorer neighborhoods or people who genuinely
[Guest 2]: believe in public service, firefighters, people in the military who would have been happy
[Guest 2]: to do it.
[Guest 2]: I know a couple of people in the UK who were part of the vaccine, the randomized trial.
[Guest 2]: They were happy to do it.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: They knew the risks involved and they didn't think it was insane.
[Guest 2]: They were young, they were healthy, they were fit.
[Guest 2]: They said, I'm single, I don't have kids.
[Guest 2]: I think that's a good idea.
[Guest 2]: So we do end up taking more risk when people think, but they don't want, you know, quote
[Guest 2]: unquote blood on their hands.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: So that's kind of what's going on.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, when Alex was, you know, describing the concept, the same phrase popped to my
[Amit Varma]: mind.
[Amit Varma]: This is the scene in the unseen in the sense that you have the scene effects of action,
[Amit Varma]: but you don't see the unseen effects of inaction or at least you don't consider them.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when we did that episode on COVID in April, Shruti, we also discussed how, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the problem with any policy decision at a time like this is that the lives that
[Amit Varma]: go because of it will be seen, but the lives that are saved will therefore be unseen.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, the same logic, of course, applies to the FDA with the legendary delays
[Amit Varma]: and all that, that, you know, they talk about the lives that they are saving by taking their
[Amit Varma]: time, but you don't, you know, what is unseen is the lives that could have been saved had
[Amit Varma]: they moved a little quicker.
[Amit Varma]: And again, I agree on the voluntary thing.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that's really my one metric for thinking about policy or thinking about action in any
[Amit Varma]: sphere is that how much of it is voluntary.
[Amit Varma]: And when you have people actually signing up and volunteering for this trial, so it's
[Amit Varma]: not like a decision that a government has to make that do we inflict this and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it's 10 deaths in one group of people versus 100 in another.
[Amit Varma]: People are volunteering to be part of a trial aware of the risks.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, why would you not just go for that?
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, it's very resonant at different levels.
[Amit Varma]: And Shruti, it's your turn now.
[Guest 2]: Ah, so you know, one of the things that I learned this year is something I've not paid
[Guest 2]: any attention to for the most part, except academically, which is tail risks, right?
[Guest 2]: So these are very low probability events, but when they do happen, and it's uncertain
[Guest 2]: if they will ever happen, they come at a very, very high cost, right?
[Guest 2]: And so one way of thinking about this is the way, you know, the public choice way, which
[Guest 2]: is governments are never going to act on these matters because, you know, these things may
[Guest 2]: never happen.
[Guest 2]: The prevention is so costly, it requires massive amount of coordination.
[Guest 2]: And there's literally no interest group that is trying to get this going, right?
[Guest 2]: On the other hand, there are so many urgent needs and there are so many interest groups,
[Guest 2]: you know, whether it's sugar subsidy to, you know, stimulus payments to social security
[Guest 2]: to education.
[Guest 2]: There are so many interest groups lobbying for so many things that those things get prioritized
[Guest 2]: and perhaps rightly so in the democratic process, right?
[Guest 2]: Maybe this is how it's supposed to work.
[Guest 2]: But I think this year has really taught us that we need to pay more attention to tail
[Guest 2]: risks, right?
[Guest 2]: And there have been people who've talked about this before.
[Guest 2]: So, of course, Bill Gates has famously talked about, you know, pandemics and how we need
[Guest 2]: to focus on, you know, some kind of not just pandemic prevention plan, but also pandemic
[Guest 2]: action plan like vaccines and things like that.
[Guest 2]: You know, there is Bill Norders, who won the Nobel Prize a few years ago, talked about
[Guest 2]: the tail risks coming out of climate change, right?
[Guest 2]: Something that we just literally pay no attention to.
[Guest 2]: If you want to lose sleep tonight, you should ask Alex about asteroids hitting the Earth,
[Guest 2]: solar flares killing our communication systems and other really terrifying.
[Guest 2]: It's scary to talk to Alex about these things.
[Guest 2]: But Alex has written about these sort of, you know, tail risks that no one pays attention
[Guest 2]: to.
[Guest 2]: They are a little bit apocalyptic.
[Guest 2]: So I think it might make sense for the world to start thinking a little bit more about
[Guest 2]: tail risks and paying attention.
[Guest 2]: I don't think, you know, your standard democratic government process is a good way of doing
[Guest 2]: it.
[Guest 2]: I think, you know, maybe the multilateral United Nations coalition, you know, something
[Guest 2]: like that, something that we developed post World War II to end a different kind of apocalyptic
[Guest 2]: world, right?
[Guest 2]: Something like that might be more suitable, where people who are a little bit removed
[Guest 2]: from everyday politics, you know, with some level of, you know, government funding and
[Guest 2]: backing exactly like the UN or the World Bank or something, you know, they are the people
[Guest 2]: who are staffed and in charge of solely thinking about these kinds of problems.
[Guest 2]: Right now, there are some risks to this because, you know, that can become its own lobbying
[Guest 2]: effort, right, to get more money for these things.
[Guest 2]: You might play up these apocalyptic situations and spread paranoia.
[Guest 2]: But frankly, right now, we are thinking so little about tail risks that we might be better
[Guest 2]: off if people did go with some scaremongering tactics, and if they did form a legitimate
[Guest 2]: interest group or lobby to, you know, seriously lobby for these sorts of things.
[Guest 2]: So I think, you know, climate change has gotten it going, but climate change, again, they
[Guest 2]: are not so focused on tail risks, they are too focused on immediate marginal, you know,
[Guest 2]: what should the emission level be at kind of discussion, they don't really focus on
[Guest 2]: some of the really terrifying situations.
[Guest 2]: So I think, you know, we could have a little bit more of that, and certainly on the question
[Guest 2]: of pandemics.
[Guest 2]: I mean, we're already hearing about a new mutation of the novel coronavirus, which is,
[Guest 2]: you know, apparently spreads more rapidly, and we don't know anything about it yet.
[Guest 2]: But apparently, these mutations are coming.
[Guest 2]: So this is not the last pandemic we have seen, is my sense.
[Guest 2]: And we could do this better if theoretically, we change the mental model to think about
[Guest 2]: tail risks.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, just earlier today, you know, the government banned flights to India coming from to and
[Unknown]: for the UK.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of reminded me of Mahatma Gandhi's Hind Swaraj, in which he wrote about how railways
[Amit Varma]: were responsible for spreading disease throughout India.
[Amit Varma]: So no doubt, Gandhi would have approved of this.
[Guest 1]: So I have a question for the two of you on a few hundred years too late on banning the
[Amit Varma]: British.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So I kind of have a question for you on tail risks, which is that, when I put myself in
[Amit Varma]: the shoes of a politician, and on the one hand, obviously, your imperatives are, you
[Amit Varma]: know, aligned towards number one, satisfying the people who give you money, because that's
[Amit Varma]: what you need to win elections, and those are the interest groups and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And number two, you're catering to voters, and therefore you care about what they care
[Amit Varma]: about, which is not the tail risks.
[Amit Varma]: And you have limited state capacity.
[Amit Varma]: As an individual politician, you have limited attentional bandwidth to devote to these matters.
[Amit Varma]: So isn't it rational to ignore extremely low probable events like pandemics or and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I'd love to know more about asteroids hitting the earth as well.
[Amit Varma]: But that seems to me to fall in the category of things we cannot control.
[Amit Varma]: So I sweat over that.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, when it comes to incentives, it's easy in hindsight to say that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: politicians should have paid attention and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But is it realistic to expect that to happen?
[Guest 2]: No, I completely agree with you.
[Guest 2]: It's in fact rational for them not to pay attention to tail risk, which is why I think
[Guest 2]: it's a lesson that we need to find something outside of democratic politics to pay attention
[Guest 2]: to that.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: We know that regular folks voting are not going to make this an important issue.
[Guest 2]: They don't even make it an important issue when they're buying insurance.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: It's really they have a lot of skin in the game.
[Guest 2]: But so it's completely rational for politicians.
[Guest 2]: And I think that's why this is such a big problem.
[Guest 2]: And that's why even when someone like Bill Gates is willing to put his own money, right,
[Guest 2]: is willing to find coalition partners, has a really big voice and a global platform and
[Guest 2]: a megaphone, he gets very few takers when he does warn people about these kinds of risks.
[Guest 2]: So we do need something.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: And I agree with you.
[Guest 2]: I don't think everyday politics is the obvious solution for this.
[Guest 2]: Telling people that they should pay attention to something that they're rationally not going
[Guest 2]: to gravitate towards has never been a good idea in any kind of politics.
[Guest 1]: So there I completely agree with you.
[Guest 1]: So I think there's a few things we can do.
[Guest 1]: You have to find some you have to tie some private good to the public good.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: So thinking about asteroids, for example, one of the things which is going to help us
[Guest 1]: with the asteroids is if we have a bigger space program.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: So there is a public good aspect to everything which Elon Musk and SpaceX are doing.
[Guest 1]: The more capability we have to operate in space, the bigger the chance that we might
[Guest 1]: be able to do something if we discovered an asteroid which was coming towards us.
[Guest 1]: And by the way, just to give you the sleepless night, by some calculations, your probability
[Guest 1]: of dying from an asteroid strike is about the same as your probability of dying in an
[Guest 1]: airplane crash.
[Guest 1]: Now you might wonder, well, how is that possible?
[Guest 1]: Well, it's possible because if there's an asteroid strike, we're all dead.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: Most of us are not going to die from an airplane crash.
[Guest 1]: But if there's an asteroid strike, the whole planet is gone.
[Guest 1]: So the probabilities are actually much higher than you might think.
[Guest 1]: So we want to look for things with private goods which are going to help us to produce
[Guest 1]: the public goods.
[Guest 1]: Another related thing is the which keeps me up at night, actually, is the solar flares.
[Guest 1]: You know, around 1890, this so-called Arrington event, we had a solar flare just at the beginning
[Guest 1]: of the Internet of a time, the telegraph era.
[Guest 1]: And that solar flare knocked out all the telegraph systems in the world.
[Guest 1]: And if we had something similar today, it would knock out the Internet, it would knock
[Guest 1]: out cars.
[Guest 1]: You wouldn't be able to drive your car because of the electrical system.
[Guest 1]: So there are things we can do today to protect our electrical systems, to protect the Internet,
[Guest 1]: to shield them from this type of solar flare.
[Guest 1]: And the way we might be able to do that is to attach some pork, right, to the public
[Guest 1]: good.
[Guest 1]: You know, here's an opportunity for firms to make some money, right, shielding all of
[Guest 1]: our cables and so forth.
[Guest 1]: So I think a greater awareness of these low probability events is extremely important.
[Guest 1]: And the way to kind of approach it politically is to attach these private goods to producing
[Guest 1]: something which has an externality, a public good externality.
[Guest 2]: That's that's the end of the show.
[Guest 2]: We are done after asteroids and solar flares.
[Guest 2]: We can go home.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, if they happen in the middle of this recording, that will be quite unlikely.
[Amit Varma]: But I once wrote a column called unlikely is inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: And this was part of the series of columns I did on poker, where, you know, people would
[Amit Varma]: complain to me that, yeah, I got to one outers on the river, two hands in a row, that should
[Amit Varma]: happen one in 4000 times, obviously, the game is rigged.
[Amit Varma]: And I would just say that, no, no, the game is not rigged.
[Amit Varma]: The thing is, if you consider the law of truly large numbers, then everything that in no
[Amit Varma]: matter how unlikely it is to happen, given enough iterations of something, it will happen
[Amit Varma]: at some point or the other.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, it is unlikely that an asteroid will strike the earth.
[Amit Varma]: But if we survive long enough, it is inevitable that at some point it will happen.
[Amit Varma]: The only question is that will there be a solar flare right before that?
[Amit Varma]: So we can't even tell each other an asteroid is coming.
[Guest 2]: Actually, an asteroid is coming, there's no point telling each other, it'll be so quick,
[Guest 2]: it'll be over before the broadband takes it across the world.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, but you you want like a few days of drama, and you want all the religious Godmen
[Amit Varma]: getting into the act and saying, do this, do that, and this is a punishment for, you
[Amit Varma]: know, absence of virtue and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, that little entertainment before we go.
[Amit Varma]: And speaking of entertainment, my first lesson is kind of like I kind of divvied up five
[Amit Varma]: lessons across the fields of entertainment, education, society, politics, and the personal,
[Amit Varma]: because I figured I'll leave COVID and science to you guys.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not sure I'm, you know, I should really butt in there.
[Amit Varma]: And here's my thought about entertainment, which is something that I kind of figured
[Amit Varma]: out in a very personal way through the experience, in fact, of doing this podcast, that if you
[Amit Varma]: go back in time, you know, entertainment and art until recently was essentially broadcasting,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: You had one person, maybe one artist or entertainer talking to many people, and often out of necessity,
[Amit Varma]: because if you're going to be profitable, you achieve some kind of scale, you have to
[Amit Varma]: kind of cater to the masses.
[Amit Varma]: So very rarely are you going to have any one-on-one intimate form, which is why that whole mode
[Amit Varma]: of radio broadcasting comes in where you talk in a particular way.
[Amit Varma]: And there is an artifice to all of that, to the presentation and all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: Now, a couple of aspects to this.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things that I realized this year with the podcast was that one people seem
[Amit Varma]: to feel this incredibly intimate connection to it.
[Amit Varma]: And I didn't realize how much, and you know, one of the realizations I've had about
[Amit Varma]: the medium, which I talk about in the course I teach on podcasting is that, you know, not
[Amit Varma]: only is audio very different from other mediums because, you know, you're a passive audience
[Amit Varma]: and you're listening at higher speeds and all that, but podcasting is very different
[Amit Varma]: from radio because in radio you're broadcasting and talking to many people.
[Amit Varma]: But when you listen to a podcast, you have a person's voice in your head and it is as
[Amit Varma]: intimate as any medium can get.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, all the podcasts that I listen to like Econ Talk or Tyler's podcast, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you feel that connection to that person, you listen to that podcast for them.
[Amit Varma]: And I sort of realized this when I opened up support for the seen and the unseen and
[Amit Varma]: just saw the depth of emotion and that people kind of have for the show.
[Amit Varma]: And even the 200th episode, I thought five hours of me talking about myself is intolerable,
[Amit Varma]: but that's, you know, one of the most popular episodes this year.
[Amit Varma]: And many people seem to have horror of horrors heard all five hours.
[Amit Varma]: So well done Shruti on breaking that record as a host.
[Amit Varma]: And another medium where I kind of noticed this because what's also happened is a lot
[Amit Varma]: of us are sort of sitting home and consuming more content on the internet than we otherwise
[Amit Varma]: would where we'll consume a lot of that content in passing is what I have seen on YouTube
[Amit Varma]: in streaming.
[Amit Varma]: And earlier I thought, okay, people are just streaming games or this, you know, stream
[Amit Varma]: panel discussions and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just, you're capturing something on video that has happened.
[Amit Varma]: But some of the best streams out there are also, you know, achieve a similar level of
[Amit Varma]: intimacy and personal connection.
[Amit Varma]: Like one sort of development that I followed very closely is after the lockdown started,
[Amit Varma]: I think towards the end of April, this guy called Samir Raina, who's a standup comedian,
[Amit Varma]: 21 year old kid, he started with stream.
[Amit Varma]: He was just throwing different things at the wall, trying different things, which is what
[Amit Varma]: you should do as a creator.
[Amit Varma]: And he started streaming on chess, an Indian grandmaster called Vidit Gujarati, who is
[Amit Varma]: right now, India's number two.
[Amit Varma]: He came across Samir Raina's channel and they got together, they played chess on the stream.
[Amit Varma]: There's a young guy called Sagar Shah, who runs a magazine called Chess Base India.
[Amit Varma]: And he's been doing stellar work for years.
[Amit Varma]: And as a chess fan, I've kind of been noticing his stellar work, you know, for very small
[Amit Varma]: audiences, but, you know, interviewing players, trying to demystify the game for new learners.
[Amit Varma]: He came on the channel and then suddenly the whole streaming scene exploded.
[Amit Varma]: Sameh helped all of them set up their own streams.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, Chess Base India on YouTube has more than half a million subscribers.
[Amit Varma]: It is insane.
[Amit Varma]: And what they would do is they would call in these guest grandmasters, like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Magnus Carlsen and Vishy Anand have all appeared on these shows.
[Amit Varma]: And they'd call in all these grandmasters.
[Amit Varma]: And they'd also cover live events where they would do commentary.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember one live event where they had like a three hour commentary on something.
[Amit Varma]: And after that commentary was over and everybody was expected to go home, they spoke for three
[Amit Varma]: more hours, where they spoke about their lives and how they got into the game and all of
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: And I was watching till five in the morning.
[Amit Varma]: It's like you come for the chess, you stay for the people, like in one of those broadcasts.
[Amit Varma]: And it's really incredible how it panned out.
[Amit Varma]: You have thousands of people watching.
[Amit Varma]: And Sagar Shah who lives in Goregaon, by the way, I must get in touch with him one of these
[Amit Varma]: days to tell him how much I like his work.
[Amit Varma]: So Sagar, you know, his internet went five minutes before the stream was going to start.
[Amit Varma]: So he kind of ran to office.
[Amit Varma]: His office was two minutes away.
[Amit Varma]: He ran to office holding his laptop and his camera and all his equipment.
[Amit Varma]: And then when the show is getting over at four, you know, there is this dialogue about
[Amit Varma]: how is he going to get home because, you know, there are dogs on the lane outside apparently
[Amit Varma]: and he's scared of them.
[Amit Varma]: And all his viewers get very worried for him.
[Amit Varma]: And then at one point he says, okay, I will shut the stream and I will start Instagram
[Amit Varma]: live and he Instagram live his whole walk from his office to his home.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't think there were any dogs on the way.
[Amit Varma]: And this kind of intimate connection which forms between creators and viewers is something
[Amit Varma]: that obviously it's been there before in various forms and it's kind of been creeping up.
[Amit Varma]: But it's something that I really noticed a lot of only sort of during this specific year.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously it's enabled by technology and it's something interesting and very beautiful
[Amit Varma]: and something that I hadn't kind of thought of earlier that, you know, no longer are you
[Amit Varma]: broadcasting to many people that even if you are effectively broadcasting to many people
[Amit Varma]: and you have, you know, thousands watching your stream, you feel that intimate connection
[Amit Varma]: with the artist and you know, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So for me, that was, you know, one of the things that surprised and delighted me.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I think you're right, Amit.
[Guest 1]: And I think the classic case, not that I would know anything about it, but would be OnlyFans,
[Guest 1]: which is the kind of porn.
[Guest 1]: What is this?
[Guest 1]: OnlyFans.
[Guest 1]: So what is that?
[Guest 1]: It is a huge exploding, basically soft porn or pornographic streaming.
[Guest 2]: But it's exactly what Amit is talking about.
[Guest 2]: It's live.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: Live.
[Guest 1]: But it's exactly what Amit is talking about in that there's a very personal connection.
[Guest 1]: So a big OnlyFan account might have, you know, a thousand or five thousand subscribers, right?
[Guest 1]: Which at ten dollars a month, you know, can be a lot of money.
[Guest 1]: But it has succeeded, as far as I've been told, precisely because it's establishing
[Guest 1]: this personal connection.
[Guest 1]: So a lot of it is not actually pornographic.
[Guest 1]: A lot of it is lonely men speaking with attractive women and having them talk about their lives
[Guest 1]: and just having these women just, you know, converse.
[Guest 1]: So a lot of it is conversation.
[Guest 1]: And I think the question is how much this is due to the pandemic, that there's a lot
[Guest 1]: of loneliness.
[Guest 1]: You know, a lot of people are cut off from friends and family and how much will go away.
[Guest 1]: But how much of these innovations will may also last?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And this also, you know, in a related sense, speaks to Kevin Kelly's concept of a thousand
[Amit Varma]: true fans, which he wrote about in an essay like more than a decade ago.
[Amit Varma]: What is finally happening where you can have a newsletter where you just have a thousand
[Amit Varma]: people subscribing, but at a hundred dollars a year, that's still, you know, a reasonable
[Amit Varma]: amount of money, if I might use that euphemism.
[Amit Varma]: So I find all this, you know, so fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: It changes the world for creators, but it also, you know, changes the world for fans
[Guest 2]: in a sense.
[Guest 2]: You know, I'm almost envious of the people who can like watch chess and discuss it for
[Guest 2]: six hours and things like that.
[Guest 2]: Because my first reaction to anything like that is that just sounds exhausting to me.
[Guest 2]: And that's probably because, you know, in one sense, I'm a different generation technologically,
[Guest 2]: right?
[Guest 2]: I'm the generation of the written word.
[Guest 2]: And even that was really hard to get.
[Guest 2]: You had to Xerox the written word and then sort of hold on to it and then read whatever
[Guest 2]: you had to read.
[Guest 2]: So this idea that you can have like lots and lots of stuff happening at the same time and
[Guest 2]: you can interact with people and you learn necessarily by talking to people, that was
[Guest 2]: never an option growing up in India for me trying to read the kinds of things I wanted
[Guest 2]: to read.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: So the reliance has always been to go by myself and read or something like that.
[Guest 2]: And we all fall back into our usual patterns when something bad happens.
[Guest 2]: And the upside to COVID has been, I think I've read the most this year since probably
[Guest 2]: graduate school.
[Guest 2]: But on the other hand, I have probably missed every cool social phenomenon of community
[Guest 2]: viewing and people are watching things at the same time and people are, you know, like
[Guest 2]: when a show launches or they're playing video games or whatever, board games simultaneously
[Guest 2]: and things.
[Guest 2]: And I sound terrible, but I have no interest in any of that and I don't gravitate towards
[Guest 2]: it.
[Guest 2]: But at the same time, now that you talk about it, I feel like maybe I'm missing out on something
[Guest 1]: sitting by myself, having my notes in these books.
[Guest 1]: There's also a negative aspect to this, which a lot of people have talked about, is that
[Guest 1]: without broadcasting, the society is becoming much more divided and there's less of a common
[Guest 1]: consensus about even what the facts are.
[Guest 1]: As we know, I saw recently a list of the top 10 streamers on YouTube and I did not recognize
[Guest 1]: a single name, right, and I'm pretty connected, you know, as far as a middle-aged man might
[Guest 1]: be.
[Guest 1]: But, you know, it's not like I'd heard the names but just didn't know, you know, hadn't,
[Guest 1]: you know, bought their album or something like that.
[Guest 1]: I did not recognize a single name.
[Guest 1]: And these were all people with, you know, 10 million subscribers or something like that,
[Guest 1]: you know, or lots of subscribers.
[Guest 1]: And so we are becoming, you know, you can now find your own facts, right?
[Guest 1]: It's very easy to go out into the world and no matter how crazy your view is, you can
[Guest 1]: find lots of people who are supporting and encouraging you.
[Guest 1]: And one thing which, very surprisingly, has been found in the behavioral economics literature,
[Guest 1]: right, is that when you get a bunch of people, let's call them crazy people, they're not
[Guest 1]: necessarily good, but you get a bunch of people together, okay, they become even crazier,
[Guest 1]: right?
[Guest 1]: Everybody sort of wants to be in the middle, as it were.
[Guest 1]: And so you get these people together, they hear, oh, maybe my view is not as crazy as
[Guest 1]: I thought, therefore I should move even further, you know, they all support one another.
[Guest 1]: And so you get these communities, you know, the anti-vaxxers are one community, you know,
[Guest 1]: the election was stolen is another community, the UFO people, that's a community.
[Guest 1]: It doesn't matter how crazy your view is, you can find a group out there who will, you
[Guest 1]: know, send you reports or emails and send you Facebook, look at this, how do you explain,
[Guest 1]: you know, how the towers on 9-11, you know, why did they fall and steel is supposed to,
[Guest 1]: you know, it's not supposed to melt and, you know, there must have been an inside job.
[Guest 2]: Any kind of crazy view can be supported now.
[Guest 2]: And they all think they are Copernicus, right, that they are the first people to discover
[Guest 2]: this.
[Guest 2]: And we are the establishment who just doesn't believe anything.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone on Twitter is an expert in whatever hashtag is trending that day.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll actually, you know, because Alex sort of almost segued into one of my other
[Amit Varma]: lessons, let's invert the order.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll go with my second lesson now, and then we'll just invert it.
[Amit Varma]: So the narrative flow seems smooth to the listener.
[Amit Varma]: And my second lesson is about narratives, which is that one of the things that you know,
[Amit Varma]: we knew it before, but I think this year has helped make it even more stark is that reality
[Amit Varma]: doesn't really matter.
[Amit Varma]: You know, narratives are everything.
[Amit Varma]: And there are all kinds of crazy narratives out there.
[Amit Varma]: And much as you know, we lived in a less connected, less democratic in the sense of ease of entry,
[Amit Varma]: you know, with the means of production not available to everyone in the 80s and 90s.
[Amit Varma]: At least what we had when I was growing up where you had a handful of mainstream publications
[Amit Varma]: was you had a broad consensus on the truth.
[Amit Varma]: One you no longer have that because everyone is producing their own stuff, which is great.
[Amit Varma]: But do what it then does is it leads to everybody living in a web of shared interconnected realities.
[Amit Varma]: And we've seen some crazy stories this year is like, of course, there are all these stories
[Amit Varma]: about how vaccines are a Bill Gate plot for surveillance and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, when SSR died, Sushant Singh Rajput, by the way, Alex was an Indian film
[Amit Varma]: star who tragically took his own life earlier this year.
[Amit Varma]: And that should have opened up a healthy dialogue on mental health and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But instead, what it did was it led to this bunch of crazy conspiracy theories, not only
[Amit Varma]: about his alleged murder by some politicians, but there were people who said that he created
[Amit Varma]: the vaccine for COVID.
[Amit Varma]: And because politicians wanted COVID to continue, they bumped him off.
[Amit Varma]: There was another theory on Twitter floating about that said that he created this video
[Amit Varma]: game called Foggy, which had just been launched by the star called Akshay Kumar.
[Amit Varma]: So Akshay Kumar had him bumped off.
[Amit Varma]: So all these crazy theories were kind of floating around.
[Amit Varma]: And which also kind of leads to a related question that, listen, I know we need narratives
[Amit Varma]: to explain the world.
[Amit Varma]: The world is complex and really impossible to make sense of in its entirety.
[Amit Varma]: So we need these simple narratives to make sense of the world.
[Amit Varma]: But people increasingly seem drawn towards these really outlandish narratives, which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and that attraction is something that I'm not sure I understand.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thing that I kind of, you know, that we, I think all of us know, but often
[Amit Varma]: it is just better to be in denial of it, is that we all live in our own constructed worlds.
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, everyone is a character in someone else's imaginary universe.
[Guest 2]: And that can be a very scary and lonely thought, you know, honestly, like this whole Sushant
[Guest 2]: Singh Rajput thing and the other things, I think it's like, you know, people who gather
[Guest 2]: around an accident that happens, you know, somewhere on a road in India.
[Guest 2]: No one helps.
[Guest 2]: They're just watching.
[Guest 2]: It's like a way to pass 10 minutes of the traffic jam and then they move on.
[Guest 2]: I think a lot of it is that, right?
[Guest 2]: I don't think people are seriously making decisions in their life based on this.
[Guest 2]: It's about as much as I am making decisions in my life, watching Tony Soprano.
[Guest 2]: You know, there is something very fascinating about watching like a mob movie or, you know,
[Guest 2]: Martin Scorsese and blow is flying all over the place and goodfellas, but that doesn't
[Guest 2]: mean I'm doing anything stronger than caffeine.
[Guest 2]: So I think there is something fascinating about it.
[Guest 2]: I think what's happening with the internet is more your earlier point, which is broadcasting
[Guest 2]: has become intimate, right?
[Guest 2]: TV news channels with their graphics and their access to, you know, you literally in Sushant
[Guest 2]: Singh Rajput's bedroom and his balcony.
[Guest 2]: So now you feel like you're watching something and you're very intimately involved in it
[Guest 2]: in a way that earlier maybe you would have read about it in a newspaper, thought about
[Guest 2]: it for a couple of minutes and moved on.
[Guest 2]: So I don't think it is that people are changing in any particular way.
[Guest 2]: I think it's just now they're consuming real life events like entertainment, right?
[Guest 2]: I knew people who had the popcorn ready when the Trump Biden debate was going on.
[Guest 2]: Nobody took it as a presidential debate.
[Guest 2]: The first thing I learned about the debate, because I didn't watch it, is the fly on Mike
[Guest 2]: Pence's hair, right?
[Guest 2]: Because this whole thing is nuts.
[Guest 2]: Nobody's listening.
[Guest 2]: They catch up on what happened in the debate on SNL, right?
[Guest 2]: That's people's source of information.
[Guest 2]: It's Colbert and SNL and Trevor Noah and things like that.
[Guest 2]: So I think we're taking it too seriously.
[Guest 2]: I don't think people really live their regular lives like that.
[Guest 2]: They have just converted information, facts, science and broadcasting into entertainment.
[Guest 2]: And we're all part of it, right?
[Guest 2]: In one sense, like Alex does MRU videos, which are perfect on economics, but they're entertaining.
[Guest 2]: They have jokes.
[Guest 2]: They have graphics.
[Guest 2]: We're all trying to turn the content we put out there as entertainment.
[Guest 2]: And now we can't blame people, you know, in one sense for thinking of this as entertainment
[Guest 2]: and getting carried away by it and then just moving on with their life.
[Guest 2]: And in the process, maybe inadvertently support some kind of crazy TV news channel or conspiracy
[Guest 2]: theory or Internet meme or something like that.
[Guest 2]: But I wouldn't take it too seriously.
[Guest 2]: I think regular folks have been exactly the same.
[Guest 2]: They have always been in 2020 as they were in any other year.
[Guest 2]: You know, when you talk to them like in the real world.
[Guest 1]: I hope you're right, Trudy, but I don't know.
[Guest 1]: Here's something which I worry about.
[Guest 1]: I think about, you know, like, why was Hitler, you know, so successful?
[Guest 1]: And when you look at Hitler today, you know, news footage or something like that, he just
[Guest 1]: looks comic, you know, he just looks foolish and kind of like, how could people take this
[Guest 1]: guy seriously?
[Guest 1]: He was supposed to be, you know, this great orator and he looks kind of silly.
[Guest 1]: And I think, you know, my theory is that a lot of what happened was we got radio and
[Guest 1]: television and cinema all at the same kind of time or all very close together.
[Guest 1]: And our brains could not handle it.
[Guest 1]: OK, so we literally thought that these people were sort of gods, because, you know, even
[Guest 1]: though you understand when you see, you know, an actor on the movie screen that they're
[Guest 1]: not really 100 foot tall, your brain just thinks, oh, this is a god.
[Guest 1]: They're 100 foot tall, right?
[Guest 1]: And so I think these dictators were in part a response to this new media.
[Guest 1]: And the new media just broke people's brains.
[Guest 1]: And eventually we kind of got used to it and learned, I hope, I think, to clamp down on
[Guest 1]: some of these feelings and to take things with a bit more grain of salt and you get
[Guest 1]: used to them and you've seen it, you know, a hundred or a thousand times, and maybe then
[Guest 1]: you begin to see, oh, this is not a god, you know, you get used to it.
[Guest 1]: But I think the Internet and social media are a new media challenge that is breaking
[Guest 1]: our brains.
[Guest 1]: And the difficulty now is can we get through this period for a long enough time to be vaccinated,
[Guest 1]: right?
[Guest 1]: To be vaccinated against the new social media, right?
[Guest 1]: We need time for our brains to become inured to this intimacy, right?
[Guest 1]: This industry that Ahmed was talking about, oh, Donald Trump is my friend.
[Guest 1]: You know, he speaks to me, right?
[Guest 1]: I mean, I see, you know, and his family, you know, Ivanka and, you know, whatever the other
[Guest 1]: ones are called, you know, they're part of my family or whatever.
[Guest 1]: And we just need time to become inured to it.
[Guest 1]: And maybe the new generation, like, I think my kids are a little bit more, you know, this
[Guest 1]: is like Batman, you know, they grew up in the darkness, you know, right?
[Guest 1]: But I don't know.
[Guest 1]: I'm not sure.
[Guest 1]: And I think I like really worry, for example, about China, right?
[Guest 1]: Like the Communist Party in China is very, very bad, but what would a populist politician
[Guest 1]: look like?
[Guest 1]: And would a populist, you know, launch a war against Taiwan or something like that?
[Guest 2]: Or India.
[Guest 1]: Or India, of course, exactly.
[Guest 1]: So just the way social media breaks our brains and can we live for long enough to become
[Guest 1]: inured to it?
[Guest 1]: I think that's a question, especially as it's getting the new media are hitting us faster
[Guest 1]: and faster and faster.
[Guest 1]: So we already are challenged by social media and, you know, virtual reality is just around
[Guest 1]: the corner.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: And here I was thinking that we need a vaccine against COVID.
[Amit Varma]: But even after that comes, we need a vaccine against social media who can inoculate us
[Amit Varma]: from Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: So, Shruti, since we inverted the order, it is now your turn to share your second lesson
[Amit Varma]: with us.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: You know, I've been thinking a lot about intergenerational tradeoffs right now.
[Guest 2]: As an economist, I would typically think about this in the context of public debt, right?
[Guest 2]: This is the classic example that governments tend to overspend because they know not only
[Guest 2]: is it they're able to spread the cause differently from the people who benefit in the present,
[Guest 2]: but also inter-temporally.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: So all the older people today are going to get their, you know, big welfare checks and
[Guest 2]: things like that.
[Guest 2]: But we're actually borrowing from the future and the future happens to be in kindergarten
[Guest 2]: right now.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: But the future cannot vote.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, you know, it's pretty easy to pass on this this huge debt burden to them.
[Guest 2]: And this is, you know, I mean, this is a very classic George Mason thing.
[Guest 2]: I mean, James Buchanan, Dick Wagner, they've done the pioneering work on debt deficits
[Guest 2]: and democratic politics in one sense.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: How this intergenerational tradeoff works and really all the standard constraints one
[Guest 2]: would imagine in democratic politics disappear once debt is in the picture.
[Guest 2]: And I've been thinking about that in the context of COVID because this pandemic is a little
[Guest 2]: bit like debt.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: It is a big cost and, you know, high fatality rates and things like that with a generation
[Guest 2]: above 65 years.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: And almost all the costs are being imposed to benefit this group.
[Guest 2]: I mean, when I say this group, just please note that I'm saying that academically.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: This group is my parents and my grandparents and things.
[Guest 2]: So, you know, it's not like random people.
[Guest 2]: And I understand that.
[Guest 2]: But it is still a different group which benefits from all the major lockdowns and, you know,
[Guest 2]: like socialist policies, the FDA policies, and maybe not all of them, but, you know,
[Guest 2]: the vaccine distribution plan that's coming in place and things like that.
[Guest 2]: And the group that's in one sense, the unseen group which is suffering the most is the kids
[Guest 2]: because of school closures.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: Especially really young kids from poorer backgrounds.
[Guest 2]: A year lost in their life is going to have very big consequences for their mental development
[Guest 2]: and their, you know, education developments.
[Guest 2]: There is good research out there that even one year of education lost has, you know,
[Guest 2]: reasonable impact, a significant impact on lifetime earnings and things like that and
[Guest 2]: building of human capital.
[Guest 2]: And even though over and over again, it's been shown that children are not at risk at
[Guest 2]: all or, you know, at such low risk that it could be the flu or, you know, any one of
[Guest 2]: the other things.
[Guest 2]: I mean, they're at higher risk from air pollution in Delhi than from COVID, you know, in those
[Guest 2]: particular age groups, in one sense, that we really should have made effort as a society
[Guest 2]: to keep, you know, schools open and maybe find another way to mitigate the costs on
[Guest 2]: the older generation.
[Guest 2]: But once again, all the incentives are stacked against that because these kids don't vote
[Guest 2]: for a very long time.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: So one lesson for me, and I'm only being partly facetious because I'm laughing, but I do want
[Guest 2]: to think about this seriously, I mean, I think I would seriously consider reducing the voting
[Guest 2]: age, right, to maybe like 14 or something like that.
[Guest 2]: Like, I think the voting age right now is too high.
[Guest 2]: And even if it's 18, people don't start voting at 18, they're in college, they just got,
[Guest 2]: you know, a privilege of driving and drinking and things like that, or, you know, being
[Guest 2]: able to buy a chainsaw if you live in the United States.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: So now we really want to think about getting them started younger.
[Guest 2]: Maybe they will think more about democratic politics.
[Guest 2]: Maybe they need an interest group backing them.
[Guest 2]: We are really missing a very big lobby that has student interests in mind.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: So there are lobbies that pretend to have student interests in mind, like schoolteachers,
[Guest 2]: but they really don't.
[Guest 2]: They're their own lobby.
[Guest 2]: In fact, all the COVID closures are to protect the teachers, not the students.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: Because the teachers who are of a certain age and might get infected.
[Guest 2]: So as outrageous as this sounds, I don't see adults making amazing decisions.
[Guest 2]: So I don't think age has anything to do with it.
[Guest 2]: But I do think, you know, there's some merit in maybe a start voting younger because some
[Guest 2]: of these intergenerational trade-offs might become a little less skewed, you know, against
[Guest 2]: the future, against the children, as it may.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, the idea of lowering the voting age is so counterintuitive that, you know, one
[Amit Varma]: reflexively thinks, what the hell?
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to.
[Amit Varma]: So whenever I hear counterintuitive ideas, I'm kind of don't react to it immediately,
[Amit Varma]: take some time to process it.
[Amit Varma]: Though it does strike me that one, you are, of course, absolutely right, that adults make
[Amit Varma]: the worst decisions.
[Amit Varma]: And, and it's not like adults are particularly mature, you know, when you are a young person,
[Amit Varma]: you think that, oh, people in their forties have everything figured out.
[Amit Varma]: And then you reach your forties and you realize that everyone is winging it, including you.
[Amit Varma]: But my other question there would be that 14 year olds wouldn't necessarily be an interest
[Amit Varma]: group for their own interests as regards their future selves, because, you know, it might
[Amit Varma]: be a bit much for them to, to expect them also to think about future trade-offs and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: The intuitive solutions that, oh, social security is good, it will take care of all of us, just
[Amit Varma]: like my parents are doing now, is probably more attractive.
[Amit Varma]: But then, I mean, I realized that, as I say this, I'm in danger of condescending to 14
[Amit Varma]: year olds.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps the world would be a better place if 14 year olds instead of 60 year olds ran
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, that's my instinctive.
[Guest 2]: You know, 14 year old kids can run a paper route, right?
[Amit Varma]: So I mean, if that is still a thing, it's not a thing anymore.
[Guest 2]: But let me give you a different example.
[Guest 2]: They can shovel snow, it's snow season here.
[Guest 2]: They can walk my dogs, right?
[Guest 2]: My dogs are the most important things in my life.
[Guest 2]: And I trust them with 16 year old kids, right?
[Guest 2]: And they're very responsible.
[Guest 2]: So in one sense, just like adults, I think even with kids, and I don't have any, so maybe
[Guest 2]: I'm a little overly optimistic about this.
[Guest 2]: Chris has raised teenagers already, so he can tell us more.
[Guest 2]: But my sense is when people need to be informed about something, they get informed about it,
[Guest 2]: right?
[Guest 2]: Right now, we have no guarantee that adults are informed about these policies either.
[Guest 2]: My hunch is not that the moment they get the right to vote earlier, they will immediately
[Guest 2]: inform themselves.
[Guest 2]: But I do think lobbies will get created.
[Guest 2]: Interest groups will get created that will cater to that group, right?
[Guest 2]: Above 50, above 60 age group, there might be something like AARP for kids, you know,
[Guest 2]: that actually sends them brochures that they don't need and informs them about things and
[Guest 2]: tells them how to vote and gives them some discounts in Teen Vogue or something.
[Guest 2]: I don't know.
[Guest 1]: Here's a way of generalizing a little bit.
[Guest 1]: I mean, I think it's true that the space of institutions, including democratic institutions
[Guest 1]: that we know, is a very small part of the potential space.
[Guest 1]: And we ought to have more experimentation in governance systems.
[Guest 1]: And like to generalize what Trudy said, how about we have a distribution of votes such
[Guest 1]: that 18-year-olds get, you know, five votes and it decreases over time.
[Guest 1]: So every decade, you get, you know, one fewer vote, you know, so 60-year-olds only get one
[Guest 1]: vote, right?
[Guest 1]: And when you immediately hear this, Amit, as you said, well, this is totally crazy.
[Guest 1]: But if you think about it a little bit, I mean, it makes a lot of sense in that young
[Guest 1]: people, they're the most affected by any decisions because they're going to live the longest,
[Guest 1]: right?
[Guest 1]: So they have the most incentive to think long-term.
[Guest 1]: Maybe you're right that they don't have the ability, but maybe 18-year-olds or 20-year-olds.
[Guest 1]: But they have the most incentive to think long-term.
[Guest 1]: On the other hand, you know, the 70- or 80-year-olds, even the really lucky ones, they're not going
[Guest 1]: to be around for that much longer.
[Guest 1]: Now maybe the counter-argument is that they have the wisdom, you know, or they think about
[Guest 1]: their kids more and, you know, and so forth.
[Guest 1]: So I don't know which one of these arguments is correct.
[Guest 1]: But it's interesting to me that what seems like a very radical position that votes should
[Guest 1]: be weighted according to age with people who are younger getting a greater weight, it seems
[Guest 1]: like very, very different from anything we've ever done, and yet perfectly sensible.
[Guest 1]: I mean, there's nothing obviously wrong with it.
[Guest 1]: And I think if we had that system, suppose for random reasons that we had started with
[Guest 1]: that system, if then you were to argue, no, no, no, no, everyone should just get one vote
[Guest 1]: and that's it, people would say, are you crazy?
[Guest 1]: That's a stupid system.
[Guest 1]: Why would you give everybody just one vote?
[Guest 1]: So it seems like there's a lot of room for different types of governance systems.
[Guest 1]: We're seeing this a little bit in blockchain, new ways of governing systems.
[Guest 1]: But more generally, I would like to see a lot more experimentation in collective governance.
[Guest 1]: Buchanan and Talek started some of this, but we don't see very much of it.
[Guest 1]: You know, we developed our democratic institutions in, you know, late 1700s, 1800s, and haven't
[Guest 1]: really changed them since then.
[Guest 2]: But you know, just in the vein of this whole experimentation thing.
[Guest 2]: So I started with a really radical position.
[Guest 2]: Now, let me give you a maybe more palatable version of that.
[Guest 2]: I don't think it is that outrageous to have kids involved in, say, referendum questions,
[Guest 2]: right, that involve schools or, you know, legalizing marijuana or, you know, legalizing,
[Guest 2]: you know, whatever is the driving or drinking age and things like that.
[Guest 2]: I think they have the most skin in the game and they should have a seat at the table,
[Guest 2]: weighted or otherwise, right?
[Guest 2]: I think it would be a great idea to experiment and have children in India vote in the panchayati
[Guest 2]: raj elections, for instance, right?
[Guest 2]: Because that is where you're really thinking about long run public goods building the infrastructure,
[Guest 2]: right?
[Guest 2]: You know, they are the people who run the local schools, right?
[Guest 2]: And that might be a good way to break the stronghold of the teachers union who are paid
[Guest 2]: by the government and propped up by the government.
[Guest 2]: And maybe, you know, we can get 14 year old kids to start voting in panchayati raj elections
[Guest 2]: or on specific referendum questions.
[Guest 2]: So I think that's, you know, maybe a little better than like, you know, overall stepping
[Guest 2]: away from one individual, one vote systems that we have and maybe experiment on particular
[Guest 2]: issues.
[Guest 2]: Of course, there's agenda sitting in a question of which issue gets what age group to vote.
[Guest 2]: And there's a whole public choice literature about that.
[Guest 2]: But I do think there is merit in experimentation.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, you know, I was chatting on a panel discussion a few days ago about cricket, where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I was telling people who are sort of, you know, purists of test cricket, cricket
[Amit Varma]: tragics, as it were, who hate 2020 cricket that listen, if 2020 cricket had come first,
[Amit Varma]: you would think that the idea of playing a sport over five days is completely absurd.
[Amit Varma]: So you have the, yeah, so you have the anchoring effect of an existing format.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, if 14 year olds were allowed to vote today, and you were to propose that
[Amit Varma]: no, we should, you know, lift the age to 18, there would be outrage and scandal everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, whenever we encounter what appears to be a radical idea, we should just think
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, are we being anchored by an earlier and old normal, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And at this point, I'll tell you a little personal anecdote, and it will seem irrelevant,
[Amit Varma]: but I'll tell you why I am telling it.
[Amit Varma]: So when I was 18 or so, because of Punjabi genes and all that I had a beard, so I had
[Amit Varma]: grown this big beard when I was 18, and I went to play the Maharashtra Junior Chess
[Amit Varma]: Championships in a city called Aurangabad.
[Amit Varma]: And this was in the early 1990s.
[Amit Varma]: And after six rounds, I was the sole leader, having beaten the local favorites also.
[Amit Varma]: So the next day, it was a nine round tournament.
[Amit Varma]: So the next day, their main English newspaper, some local newspaper, not one of the national
[Amit Varma]: ones, but it was the biggest English newspaper then, had me on their front page, a photograph
[Amit Varma]: of me with my beard, had me on my front page, not the sports page, the front page, with
[Amit Varma]: the headline, is this man really under 20, which was what Juniors was.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, it's actually a valid, though I was, of course, legit.
[Amit Varma]: And I showed my birth certificate and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But it is actually a scam in many parts of Northern India, because people want to play
[Amit Varma]: for under 19 and under 16.
[Amit Varma]: They hedge their edge, like there's a, you know, they fake their age, and they have fake
[Amit Varma]: certificates.
[Amit Varma]: There is, in fact, a joke about the Pakistani cricket player, Shahid Afridi, who was 17
[Amit Varma]: for 10 years.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that if you actually, you know, had this kind of proportional, the weightages
[Amit Varma]: for younger people, where a 14 year old gets five votes, then you would have a similar
[Guest 2]: scam kind of cropping up.
[Guest 2]: Actually, you know, that way, maybe we can shoot, kill two birds with one stone, and
[Guest 2]: the government has better incentive to register births in India.
[Guest 2]: And just throwing this out there, that if the birth certificate becomes such a big issue.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and as if that process cannot get corrupted, and as if you don't have a state capacity
[Amit Varma]: problem, but I guess blockchain could be a solution down the line.
[Guest 2]: But you know, going back to the thing you said, which is this radical, you know, we
[Guest 2]: get anchored to particular systems, and then anything else sounds crazy.
[Guest 2]: I think we should take a leaf out of like Ambedkar's book, like, introducing universal
[Guest 2]: adult franchise in India in 1950, is one of the most outrageous things that the world
[Guest 2]: has ever heard of, right?
[Guest 2]: And literally, nobody thought it would work, right?
[Guest 2]: Everyone said, this is going to be bad, 90% of your population is illiterate.
[Guest 2]: How are illiterate people going to even know the name to put on the ballot?
[Guest 2]: And you know, I mean, we've moved to a system of symbols, and hence the lotus and the hand
[Guest 2]: and they like, they managed to solve every single problem.
[Guest 2]: India is a very thriving democracy in terms of voting, right?
[Guest 2]: India votes in overwhelming numbers, one of the highest voter turnouts in the world, repeatedly
[Guest 2]: across all levels of election, local to national.
[Guest 2]: So this thing that was called the most outrageous experiment to ever be conducted, right?
[Guest 2]: You're handing women the right to vote, along with everyone else, right?
[Guest 2]: How are we going to verify women who are in purdah?
[Guest 2]: They're going to cover their face, right?
[Guest 2]: How do we register their name, Mrs. so and so or by their own name?
[Guest 2]: It is these crazy questions that popped up.
[Guest 2]: They're all there in Ornishani's book, and you know, we can read about it.
[Guest 2]: But it was an outrageous experiment.
[Guest 2]: And now we just completely take it for granted, right?
[Guest 2]: So maybe we should be like Ambedkar and push for some really, really outrageous experiments,
[Guest 2]: right?
[Guest 2]: And have, you know, illiterate people, young people, 14 year olds, why not?
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating, fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And even do ultrasound on babies still in the womb to figure out their voting preferences.
[Guest 2]: Technology can.
[Amit Varma]: That's illegal in India.
[Amit Varma]: Anything.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, indeed.
[Amit Varma]: So, Alex, let's, let's move on to your second lesson.
[Amit Varma]: We're only on the second lesson.
[Unknown]: Oh, my gosh.
[Guest 1]: I brought snacks.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: Second is something which Mark Andreessen, the venture capitalist, but also the writer
[Guest 1]: of the first web browser, he said a few years ago, software is eating the world.
[Guest 1]: And I think that's true in a lot of circumstances.
[Guest 1]: But what is particular, what we're seeing now is software is eating the biological world
[Guest 1]: because these mRNA vaccines, it's really incredible.
[Guest 1]: It's software.
[Guest 1]: Here's an amazing fact is that the virus was coded, you know, by Chinese scientists, something
[Guest 1]: like January 13th, and was sent to the people in the United States got it at Moderna.
[Guest 1]: And they developed a vaccine literally within two days.
[Guest 1]: And so the digital virus got to the United States before the actual virus did.
[Guest 1]: You know, maybe there's some dispute about when exactly it came, but the digital virus
[Guest 1]: moved around the world very, very quickly.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: And so Moderna, who has developed this vaccine, they never even looked at the virus itself.
[Guest 1]: So they didn't get any samples, you know, they just looked at the code.
[Guest 1]: So they read the code and then they figured out, OK, here is a here's the protein which
[Guest 1]: we're going to go after.
[Guest 1]: And in the computer, they designed the vaccine, the mRNA vaccine, and then essentially what
[Guest 1]: happens is that that vaccine is printed.
[Guest 1]: So on previous vaccines, you know, we grew them in these vats.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: And that's actually part of the danger, because one, if you're dealing with the actual virus,
[Guest 1]: it could contaminate and get out and infect the vaccine itself.
[Guest 1]: And two, when you are growing things, there is a opportunity for bacterial infection.
[Guest 1]: And it's very complicated, always very.
[Guest 1]: It's like it's like cooking.
[Guest 1]: It's like making a souffle.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: So the old way of making a vaccine was like making a souffle and you get just one element
[Guest 1]: wrong and the souffle collapses.
[Guest 1]: In the new style, the mRNA vaccines, you're more or less printing the vaccine.
[Guest 1]: And then when you inject it into the body, you're actually not injecting the vaccine
[Guest 1]: per se, you're injecting instructions.
[Guest 1]: And the body's cells pick up those instructions and they use that to generate the so-called
[Guest 1]: spike protein, which then the body is alerted to, oh, this is a foreign, gets a sneak peek
[Guest 1]: at it.
[Guest 1]: This is a foreign invader.
[Guest 1]: And so the body's immune system learns how to attack the spike protein so that when it's
[Guest 1]: actually challenged by the real virus, the body has built up its defenses.
[Guest 1]: So what we have done, in effect, is this is what we we knew we were getting there when
[Guest 1]: we had the human genome project.
[Guest 1]: We've always talked about, well, we're going to we have the blueprint and now we're going
[Guest 1]: to read the code.
[Guest 1]: This is the code.
[Guest 1]: But this is a really a tremendous example of this in practice.
[Guest 1]: We read the code of the virus.
[Guest 1]: We created a code for the vaccine.
[Guest 1]: We inject that into the body and then the body produces its own defenses by reading
[Guest 1]: this code.
[Guest 1]: And we're going to be able to do that for many, many other things, because everything
[Guest 1]: that goes on in the body involves creating a protein, right?
[Guest 1]: Creating some kind of machine, which is basically what proteins are.
[Guest 1]: And there's a system for reading the DNA or the RNA, the messenger RNA, and creating these
[Guest 1]: proteins.
[Guest 1]: And so everything which goes on in the body is creating these proteins.
[Guest 1]: So one of the things which Moderna is working on, for example, is to target the messenger
[Guest 1]: RNA to the type of cells which you need to read it and create a new protein.
[Guest 1]: So one of the things that they're working on is you have a heart attack.
[Guest 1]: You need to develop new heart muscle.
[Guest 1]: So if you can have a mRNA and you inject it and so that it's read by the heart muscle
[Guest 1]: cells, and then they're told, create this protein for building blood vessels, for building
[Guest 1]: more muscle, right?
[Guest 1]: So you can instruct the body to fix itself.
[Guest 1]: And we're going to see a lot more of this.
[Guest 1]: And so I think that one of the unexpected or one of the unintended consequences of this
[Guest 1]: is that we've advanced the mRNA technology and more and more biology is going to be understood
[Guest 1]: as software.
[Guest 1]: And we're going to be able to program that software to do things which are going to save
[Amit Varma]: lives and improve health.
[Amit Varma]: It almost feels magical, right?
[Amit Varma]: And I remember an old Douglas Adams quote where he's talking about religion and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, how one of the things that religion tries to do through ritual and spectacle in
[Amit Varma]: these grand churches and all of that is institute a sense of awe and wonder in the person.
[Amit Varma]: And Adams's point was that, you know, when I first understood how natural selection works,
[Amit Varma]: the science of it, that is what filled me with awe and wonder.
[Amit Varma]: And that's what this kind of science does, you know, like, although I'm utterly ignorant
[Amit Varma]: of the science, I was skeptical of a vaccine coming so far simply because there had never
[Amit Varma]: been a coronavirus vaccine before.
[Amit Varma]: There were other vaccines for the flus, which are not caused by coronaviruses, but never
[Amit Varma]: a vaccine for the coronavirus.
[Amit Varma]: And we've seen how long the HIV vaccine has been.
[Amit Varma]: They've been trying to get an HIV vaccine out, which is also, you know, addressing a
[Amit Varma]: virus and they failed to do that.
[Amit Varma]: So to have this happen within a period of months and almost, you know, with a software
[Amit Varma]: update as it were, instead of, you know, working with old clunky hardware seems to me magical.
[Amit Varma]: And it also seems to me that this also tells us that we are old clunky hardware and that
[Amit Varma]: we are creating this incredible software, which can, you know, although people, you
[Amit Varma]: know, would talk about, talk in alarmist tones about the existential threat to humanity from
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's, it's incredible because it can just, you know, our hardware is what it is,
[Amit Varma]: but our software can improve our lives in such incredible ways.
[Guest 2]: You know, this brings me to something that was one of my lessons, but I think this is
[Guest 2]: a nice point to add this in.
[Guest 2]: Like one of the things I've learned is science is on its path to solving these problems.
[Guest 2]: The problem is economic illiteracy, right?
[Guest 2]: So this is your lesson three, therefore.
[Guest 2]: This is my lesson three, but it works perfectly well without, it follows perfectly from what
[Guest 2]: Alex is saying, because just think about this, right?
[Guest 2]: By late Jan, we have already coded and sequenced the vaccine, right?
[Guest 2]: Everything else is an enormous failure in the understanding of costs and benefits and
[Guest 2]: allocation and delivery, right?
[Guest 2]: I mean, I'm in this at December right now, we're just shy of Christmas.
[Guest 2]: I don't expect to get the vaccine because I'm young and healthy and, you know, not an
[Guest 2]: essential worker or anything before the end of spring, maybe even halfway through summer,
[Guest 2]: depending on when Virginia gets its act together.
[Guest 2]: It would have by then been maybe 17, 18 months since we actually had the scientific answer,
[Guest 2]: right?
[Guest 2]: And all the other problems are things like, you know, the omission commission bias that
[Guest 2]: Alex talked about.
[Guest 2]: You know, one thing, Alex, I don't know if you mentioned this here or before, but, you
[Guest 2]: know, the FDA is supposed to be bureaucratic, right?
[Guest 2]: Like, I mean, their entire job is to slow down things so that they get the mandate during
[Guest 2]: a global pandemic, which is also an emergency.
[Guest 2]: They just don't know how to speed it up because every protocol in their book is to slow things
[Guest 2]: down and make them safer and consider every, you know, one side of the trade off alone.
[Guest 2]: That's the job we gave them to do, right?
[Guest 2]: So we don't get more Ford Pinto equivalents in the, you know, medical world or whatever.
[Guest 2]: And now we're telling them act fast and we just don't have an alternative.
[Guest 2]: FDA's emergency procedures are slower than their regular procedures, believe it or not,
[Guest 2]: right?
[Guest 2]: FDA's emergency procedures stop labs from innovating private labs from testing, right?
[Guest 2]: So if they hadn't declared an emergency, then we might have had better testing in the United
[Guest 2]: States than we actually did after the FDA declared the emergency, right?
[Guest 2]: So there are just these bizarre institutions we've created that have no, I mean, it's not
[Guest 2]: clear they're good on science, but let's assume they're good on the science, but they're certainly
[Guest 2]: not good on the economics, right?
[Guest 2]: We had such a big and political problem with masks in the United States, because initially
[Guest 2]: Dr. Fauci and others, right, they said masks are not necessary because they were worried
[Guest 2]: that there won't be enough masks for, you know, frontline workers.
[Guest 2]: That is a failure in understanding demand and supply.
[Guest 2]: You know, that is not a failure in communication.
[Guest 2]: And that is certainly not a failure.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you could just call Alex Tabarrok or watch like one of the MRU videos and they
[Guest 2]: will tell you, I have made a video on price gouging and how supply is forthcoming, right?
[Guest 2]: Like ask anyone who knows Econ 101 and they will tell you that if you tell people masks
[Guest 2]: are essential, supply of masks is going to be forthcoming.
[Guest 2]: There is no inelastic demand curve for that.
[Guest 2]: So my big lesson is we are not teaching enough people outside of, you know, professional
[Guest 2]: academic economists, or maybe we will go to business school and take a couple of sequences.
[Guest 2]: We don't teach them enough economics, right?
[Guest 2]: And the follow up to that is we certainly don't teach them enough ethics, right?
[Guest 2]: To think about these broader questions of, you know, how we choose solve the trolley
[Guest 2]: problem or how do we solve a challenge trial problem or something like that, which I also
[Guest 2]: think is essential.
[Guest 2]: And economics could have, you know, just having basic understanding of how supply chains work
[Guest 2]: and the world works would have gotten us this vaccine a hell of a lot sooner than it actually
[Guest 2]: happened.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: The failure to do cost benefit analysis, even very simple cost benefit analysis is unbelievable.
[Guest 1]: And it affected even economists.
[Guest 1]: I've just been shocked, actually, the debates that I have had with fellow economists who
[Guest 1]: in the face of thousands of people dying are still saying, well, maybe the, you know, FDA
[Guest 1]: waiting three weeks, you know, maybe that's OK.
[Guest 1]: We still need to do peer review and like just not being able to, you know, run some simple
[Guest 1]: numbers and do the cost benefit analysis, run the numbers, you know, and a lot of economists
[Guest 1]: even have not been able to do that, with some exceptions, like Paul Romer has been great
[Guest 1]: right from the very beginning.
[Guest 1]: He ran the numbers on testing and said, look, this is insane.
[Guest 1]: We're losing trillions of dollars in wealth and we could save this with billions of dollars
[Guest 1]: investment in testing.
[Guest 1]: And he was saying that, you know, practically from day one.
[Guest 1]: So a few economists have been good.
[Guest 1]: You know, when I spoke with people in Congress, you know, I told them, you know, like I'm
[Guest 1]: a fairly conservative kind of free market economist.
[Guest 1]: You know, I don't say this very often.
[Guest 1]: In fact, I've never said this before.
[Guest 1]: But now is the time to throw money at the problem.
[Guest 1]: And you know, it's not like some genius insight here.
[Guest 1]: The insight was, you know, the U.S. economy is losing hundreds of billions of dollars
[Guest 1]: every single month.
[Guest 1]: And we have trillions on one side and billions on the other.
[Guest 1]: That's a very simple cost benefit analysis.
[Guest 1]: We need to invest in vaccines.
[Guest 1]: We need to invest in testing.
[Guest 1]: And this is going to save lives and it's going to save money at the same time.
[Guest 1]: And yet that was just incredibly hard even to get that simple message across.
[Guest 1]: You know, we've got sticker shock when the Kramer and I and the team were saying we ought
[Guest 1]: to be spending, you know, $100 billion on vaccines.
[Guest 1]: And people were going, you can't say $100 billion, that's just going to freak people
[Guest 1]: out.
[Guest 1]: You know, sticker shock.
[Guest 1]: And so fortunately, we did Operation Warp Speed, which was very, very good.
[Guest 1]: You know, Operation Warp Speed is really the only bright spot in the Trump administration's
[Guest 1]: response to the pandemic.
[Guest 1]: But it still was too small.
[Guest 1]: And we told them it was too small.
[Guest 1]: I mean, again, I want to say I'm grateful, I really am grateful for Operation Warp Speed
[Guest 1]: and Peter Marks at the FDA and Perna, General Perna, and Slowy, and all those guys have
[Guest 1]: done great, better than anybody else in the world, in fact, as Europe is now finding out.
[Guest 1]: But we should have done more.
[Guest 1]: And it was obvious that we should have done more.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, so one part is like just Operation Warp Speed and like getting like the big numbers
[Guest 2]: and those kinds of, you know, someone needs to do this analysis and get it across sort
[Guest 2]: of thing.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: But a lot of it is even like baby stuff.
[Guest 2]: I mean, we're having a run on toilet paper in the United States.
[Guest 2]: It's like, you know, you're in Soviet Union or something.
[Guest 2]: The whole thing is nuts.
[Guest 2]: It's just a complete misunderstanding of, you know, very basic things like, you know,
[Guest 2]: people struggling to get a mask, people struggling to get hand sanitizer, you know, not being
[Guest 2]: able to move about.
[Guest 2]: I bought hand sanitizer in a gallon size and I sent it to our friend Mario Rizzo in New
[Guest 2]: York City because they had all sorts of like price gouging laws where nobody could sell
[Guest 2]: hand sanitizer in reasonable quantities.
[Guest 2]: So this is just like I mean, it's so basic.
[Guest 2]: If a student of mine in my principal's class did not know the answers to this question,
[Guest 2]: they would probably fail the class.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: And these are the people at the highest levels of government and policy and technology who
[Guest 2]: are making decisions who are allowed to do this, not just with other people's money,
[Guest 2]: but with other people's lives.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: And it permeates everything.
[Guest 2]: It's like, you know, I mean, we have Emily Oster.
[Guest 2]: She has this great sub stack on, you know, COVID and its impact on children and school
[Guest 2]: closures and things like that, just massive amount of evidence on the costs on the one
[Guest 2]: side because of the loss of learning, especially disproportionately falling on the poor and
[Guest 2]: the benefits of, you know, allowing a little bit of, you know, opening of schools and maybe
[Guest 2]: closing something else down instead.
[Guest 2]: What shocks me is these are non starters in the United States.
[Guest 2]: There are just no takers for these conversations.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: It's like even in India, opening schools right now is dead on arrival.
[Guest 2]: No one will even consider it, but you can go to a movie theater.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: Because that's 25 percent occupancy.
[Guest 2]: Movie theaters are allowed.
[Guest 2]: So the whole thing just seems a little bit like, you know, odd to me that these people
[Guest 2]: don't get these basic concepts.
[Guest 2]: Not only do they not know cost benefit analysis, as Alex pointed out, they don't even know
[Guest 2]: that cost benefit analysis should be done to guide the decision.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: What you do is you pick up the phone and call Michael Kramer and Alex Tabarrok and say,
[Guest 2]: hey, you guys seem like you know how to do this thing.
[Guest 2]: Why don't you do it for us?
[Guest 2]: But the instinct is just not to do it.
[Guest 2]: The second thing I want to say here is there is this extreme reaction to profit.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: Like just people making money, that is enough for progressives in the United States to shut
[Guest 2]: every good idea down.
[Guest 2]: We are OK delaying the vaccine, but we don't want a big pharma company to profit.
[Guest 2]: And I'm sort of the opposite.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: I'm like, can we make them more profit so that I can get it tomorrow instead of getting
[Guest 2]: the vaccine six months from now?
[Guest 2]: But this somehow like almost like I don't know what it is.
[Guest 2]: It's like some visceral biological reaction against profit making by somebody else where
[Guest 2]: even ideas that would benefit oneself, like they will cut their nose to spite their face.
[Guest 2]: By they, I mean the New York Times.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: Like that's how bad the narrative and the commentary is when it discusses things like,
[Guest 2]: you know, should you give someone a subsidy or a short contract or some just complete
[Guest 2]: misunderstanding of what is at stake?
[Guest 2]: You know, do we really need to prevent them from making a few extra dollars or a few extra
[Guest 2]: million dollars if we can save, you know, so many lives, every life, by the way?
[Guest 2]: You know, the rough estimate is like nine to ten million dollars.
[Guest 2]: I think Alex will know this number better with Operation Warp Speed.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: But what's the, you know, economists reduce the human life.
[Guest 2]: We're always called reductive.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: But they reduce it to a pretty large and meaningful number that tells you that we must act very,
[Guest 2]: very fast.
[Guest 2]: So those are the sorts of things that have just annoyed me.
[Guest 2]: And I have become more of an economic imperialist than I ever was before this.
[Guest 2]: And I come from George Mason.
[Guest 2]: So I was already there.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: But I'm really I have gone nuts in my head over this.
[Guest 2]: This just really bothers me.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: Riffing off Mencken, I said, progressivism, the haunting fear that someone somewhere is
[Guest 1]: making a profit.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So, I mean, I have a couple of thoughts.
[Amit Varma]: One, I'd like to clarify to the listeners that when we use all these numbers, when Alex
[Amit Varma]: says that, you know, hundreds of billions were lost by the economy every month, these
[Amit Varma]: are not just numbers.
[Amit Varma]: We're not just talking about money.
[Amit Varma]: These have economics, economics as humanitarian consequences.
[Amit Varma]: This is lives being lost, futures being stunted.
[Amit Varma]: It's humanitarian all the way, which is why, you know, one of the reasons I call Indira
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi such a monster was not just what she did during the emergency and the forced sterilizations
[Amit Varma]: and all that, but the disastrous economics which kept millions of people in India in
[Amit Varma]: poverty for decades longer than necessary.
[Amit Varma]: And some of that came down from this mindset, like about profit.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Nehru once famously said to JRD Tata, quote, do not speak to me of profit.
[Amit Varma]: It is a dirty word.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this brings me to my question.
[Amit Varma]: Now, one reason people do think of profit in these terms is because they think of the
[Amit Varma]: world in zero-sum ways, which our brains are wired to do because we have evolved in times
[Amit Varma]: of scarcity.
[Amit Varma]: And it's rational to think in terms of zero-sum ways that, you know, if somebody else gets
[Amit Varma]: something, that means I can't, and therefore it's that kind of an equation.
[Amit Varma]: And you see the same thing playing out where people are complaining about all the companies
[Amit Varma]: that have profited during the pandemic.
[Amit Varma]: But the bottom line is, how do you make a profit in a free market?
[Amit Varma]: You know, one way, of course, is you use the coercive power of the state and you become
[Amit Varma]: a crony and you use those privileges.
[Amit Varma]: But in a free market where you aren't being a crony, the only way to make a profit is
[Amit Varma]: to make people better off.
[Amit Varma]: It is a positive sum game.
[Amit Varma]: You make their lives better off in some way, and you'll make a profit.
[Amit Varma]: And like you said, you know, if they were allowed to make more profit, they'd work harder
[Amit Varma]: at serving society.
[Amit Varma]: As it were, to me, profit is much more, much more effective than philanthropy in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: So my question here is that, sure, I get your lament that economic illiteracy remains a
[Amit Varma]: problem even if the science works out.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what do we do about the economic illiteracy?
[Amit Varma]: But isn't that almost an insurmountable problem?
[Amit Varma]: Because our brains are wired to think in ways which mitigate against, you know, like many
[Amit Varma]: of the concepts that we know explain the world, like the positive sum nature of voluntary
[Amit Varma]: exchange, like spontaneous order, are deeply unintuitive.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, people simply, you know, resist accepting those kind of truths.
[Amit Varma]: And even trained economists will often, you know, revert back to the way their brains
[Amit Varma]: are hardwired.
[Amit Varma]: So is that more of a lament than a lesson?
[Guest 2]: No, you know, I'm an optimist, and this might be because of my choice of profession.
[Guest 2]: But I have taught principles microeconomics less than Alex has.
[Guest 2]: He's written a book that I have taught, but I have taught that book.
[Guest 2]: And you can literally see the wheels turning in the class, right, when you explain how
[Guest 2]: choice is made on the margin or the world is not a zero sum game or, you know, the gains
[Guest 2]: from trade.
[Guest 2]: I teach comparative advantage and literally like their brain explodes when that production
[Guest 2]: possibility frontier like goes out.
[Guest 2]: I don't think of myself as anyone with exceptional capacity or my students were certainly not
[Guest 2]: people of above average intelligence.
[Guest 2]: They were just regular college students, you know, trying to get through whatever one of
[Guest 2]: their basic one on one courses.
[Guest 2]: They got it.
[Guest 2]: It is unintuitive, but that means it needs to be taught right.
[Guest 2]: Even 12 times 12 was unintuitive until I learned what it was.
[Guest 2]: So I think this whole like I know the zero sum game thing, but there is we don't think
[Guest 2]: of economics as a science.
[Guest 2]: We don't think it has value in anything beyond making money.
[Guest 2]: And I think that is just a fundamental misunderstanding of, you know, I don't know if this is the
[Guest 2]: it does.
[Guest 2]: Alex, how does the book begin?
[Guest 2]: Does it say economics is the science of living a better life?
[Guest 2]: What does it say?
[Guest 2]: Starts with the example of the quotation before.
[Guest 2]: Economics is all about getting the most out of economics is all about getting the most
[Guest 2]: out of life.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: So it's not about making money.
[Guest 2]: It's not like the scientific abstract thing, though there are abstract concepts.
[Guest 2]: If I can teach it right and I'm not Isaac Newton to like do any of like genius level
[Guest 2]: things.
[Guest 2]: And if my students can learn it, then it can be done.
[Guest 2]: We just need to start them younger.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: I mean, Trudy is right.
[Guest 1]: Of course, Trudy can teach.
[Guest 1]: She was a great teacher, as are you know that.
[Guest 1]: But there is another problem, and that is that we have collectivized decision making
[Guest 1]: so much that actually teaching people economics is sort of the second best solution in a way
[Guest 1]: that we have to because we are making so many decisions collectively.
[Guest 1]: And that is now our reflex, right, to think that every single decision, well, we got to
[Guest 1]: talk about it.
[Guest 1]: You know, we have to subject this to the democratic process.
[Guest 1]: We got to everyone has to have their take on Twitter and so forth.
[Guest 1]: Well, in the past, we wouldn't debate price gouging because people would just raise their
[Guest 1]: prices.
[Guest 1]: You know, if you have a free market, you know, things happen without as if guided by an invisible
[Guest 1]: hand, shall we say.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: But the problem is, is that now the invisible hand needs permission.
[Guest 1]: It needs permission to do just about anything.
[Guest 1]: We have locked the invisible hand in a cage and sometimes we'll say, OK, we'll let it
[Guest 1]: out, you know, and we'll let it do its magic here.
[Guest 1]: But before we do that, we got to have a debate about it.
[Guest 1]: We got to talk about it, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
[Guest 1]: We have to have some, you know, some voting and everyone gets their say.
[Guest 1]: And so and this is the problem with when you collectivize in particular innovation, nobody,
[Guest 1]: very few people are in favor of innovation.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: Because innovation always disrupts rents.
[Guest 1]: It disrupts the ordinary way of doing things, the old way of doing things, the way which
[Guest 1]: is satisfied people in the past.
[Guest 1]: And innovation benefits only a small number of people at the very beginning.
[Guest 1]: And that small number of people, they get rich, you know, like Jeff Bezos, something
[Guest 1]: like that.
[Guest 1]: And then over time, everyone benefits, as we've discovered in the pandemic, as we've
[Guest 1]: all had to rely on Amazon trucks delivering us goods and services to survive.
[Guest 1]: But if you had to put that up to a vote, it would never have passed.
[Guest 1]: You know, I give the example of Uber, right?
[Guest 1]: Uber was very wise in scaling up extremely quickly and starting before anybody had a
[Guest 1]: chance to vote on this.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: So if you would ask people, do you think it's a good idea that strangers in a car should
[Guest 1]: be able to pick other people up, other strangers and give them a ride?
[Guest 1]: You know what?
[Guest 1]: What?
[Guest 1]: Our mothers always told us was the one thing our mother kept telling us.
[Guest 1]: Never get in a car with a stranger.
[Guest 1]: You know, if a stranger offers you a ride, say no and run away as quickly as you can.
[Guest 1]: Now you want to make it so that anybody can stop and give you a ride just because you
[Guest 1]: get a message on your phone.
[Guest 1]: That's crazy.
[Guest 1]: If we had had to put Uber up to a vote, Uber would never have won.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: And there's a huge amount of innovations like that, like aspirin would never have gotten
[Guest 1]: through the FDA process today.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: And so we have collectivized decision making so much that now we have to teach people economics
[Guest 1]: so that we might hope to get some decent decisions.
[Guest 1]: But I would also and we should do that and I want to do that, but we should also let's
[Guest 1]: leave more decisions to individual choice and the market and let's collectivize fewer
[Guest 2]: decisions.
[Guest 2]: But Alex, even that insight that one must collectivize fewer decisions come from having
[Guest 2]: an understanding of the market that you can have, you know, in the right institutional
[Guest 2]: setting, self-interest aligned with social interest.
[Guest 2]: That idea itself is not intuitive to anyone outside of economics.
[Amit Varma]: No, it can also come from a basic moral compass.
[Amit Varma]: For example, one thing I want to kind of clarify for my listeners is that when Alex is speaking
[Amit Varma]: against collectivized decision making, and I agree with him entirely, he is not saying
[Amit Varma]: that an autocrat or a dictator make the decision instead.
[Amit Varma]: What he is saying is leave it to individual choice, respect individual choice, and things
[Amit Varma]: will work out.
[Amit Varma]: Individuals can make decisions for themselves on what they want to do.
[Amit Varma]: And those kinds of voluntary interaction in the marketplace can help and to give a very
[Amit Varma]: brief econ 101 for people who are wondering why we are not against price gouging.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what would happen if you put a price control on masks, for example, if you say
[Amit Varma]: masks are important, therefore, they should not be too expensive.
[Amit Varma]: Therefore, they should only be like 30 rupees each or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: What would instantly happen is that your existing supply of masks would be sold out on a first
[Amit Varma]: come first serve basis, leading to an immediate scarcity.
[Amit Varma]: What would then further happen is that, you know, a higher price would be an incentive
[Amit Varma]: to potential manufacturers to put masks out there for that evil word profit, which would
[Amit Varma]: benefit everybody because your supply of masks would go up.
[Amit Varma]: But that information and that incentive would no longer be there because who's going to
[Amit Varma]: make mass for 30 bucks.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, even that supply would kind of not get filled up.
[Guest 2]: We concur.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so on that note of concurrence, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And then when we come back, we shall go through the rest of our 84 lessons from 2020.
[Amit Varma]: As many of you know, I'll soon be coming out with a four volume anthology of the seen and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen books organized around the themes of politics, history, economics, and society
[Amit Varma]: and culture.
[Amit Varma]: These days, I'm wading through over 3 million words of conversation from all my episodes
[Amit Varma]: so far to curate the best bits.
[Amit Varma]: And for this to happen, I needed transcripts.
[Amit Varma]: And that was made possible by a remarkable young startup called TAPCHIEF.
[Amit Varma]: TAPCHIEF at TAPCHIEF.com is a digital platform that allows companies to outsource work to
[Amit Varma]: their network of freelancers.
[Amit Varma]: And TAPCHIEF's network includes more than 125,000 people as of now, you want people
[Amit Varma]: to make you a web page or design a logo or compose a jingle or do some digital marketing
[Amit Varma]: for you.
[Amit Varma]: TAPCHIEF gives you an easy way to reach out to freelancers competing for your work.
[Amit Varma]: I can say from first hand experience how valuable this has been for me and solve the problem
[Amit Varma]: I was actually a bit worried about.
[Amit Varma]: So do go over to TAPCHIEF.com and check out all that TAPCHIEF has to offer.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe they could solve your problem too.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the seen and the unseen Shruti Rajgopal and Alex Tabarrok and I are sharing
[Amit Varma]: five lessons each which we learned from 2020 or which we think 2020 holds for us.
[Amit Varma]: And we are through seven of them, there are eight more to go.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, it's entirely natural for Shruti and Alex to do this because they are professional
[Amit Varma]: educators.
[Amit Varma]: I on the other hand, I'm a bit of a pretender.
[Amit Varma]: So I hope you're not too bored by my lesson.
[Amit Varma]: You know, since we are mixing the order up like this, I'll kind of go next because it
[Amit Varma]: follows from what both of you were talking about earlier.
[Amit Varma]: And it is outrageously enough given that you guys are the educators.
[Amit Varma]: It's about education, but it's been something that I've been thinking about for a while.
[Amit Varma]: And this lesson is not one of the standard lessons that people are learning about education
[Amit Varma]: from 2020 about, you know, whether online education is good or bad or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: It is just that, you know, there is like Shruti, you spoke about, you know, how one of the
[Amit Varma]: things that plagues America, for example, is these outdated institutions like the FDA.
[Amit Varma]: And we've also spoken before this of the anchoring effects of old normals.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that the way education is designed is it's a complete misfit for the
[Amit Varma]: modern world.
[Amit Varma]: Like our education system essentially was, uh, you know, designed in the 19th century
[Amit Varma]: and all it's, you know, everything that it kind of does in the sense that you have so
[Amit Varma]: many classes or standards or grades, you know, you go from class one to class 10, these are
[Amit Varma]: the subjects you learn.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody just goes one year at a time.
[Amit Varma]: Students of the same age study together, what the subjects are, the way that they are taught,
[Amit Varma]: the entire structure of, uh, that system, I think is open to questioning because, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the premises that existed when that system was designed, they don't really exist
[Amit Varma]: right now, you know, and we know that higher education, for example, works for signaling,
[Amit Varma]: but does it work for knowledge necessarily like, you know, in India, for example, I'd
[Amit Varma]: done an episode on education with Karthik Muralidharan where he said that the Indian
[Amit Varma]: education system is designed to sort and not teach is good for sorting versus teaching.
[Amit Varma]: We're not really teaching anything.
[Amit Varma]: And this is reflected in the supply demand mismatch that yes, there is a jobs crisis,
[Amit Varma]: but regardless of that, there is an issue that very often companies cannot find trained
[Amit Varma]: workers while you have these tens of thousands of graduates and even PhDs who are coming
[Amit Varma]: out of Indian universities who do not have the skills to do anything useful in the world,
[Amit Varma]: at least not given to them by education on their own, they might pick up stuff, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so you have hundreds of PhDs applying for the single vacancy of a peon.
[Amit Varma]: And this alone indicates that there is, you know, a savage problem here.
[Amit Varma]: And what I find is that many of the new online startups that are starting are again mimicking
[Amit Varma]: this old model of education that, you know, someone like a by juices basically focusing
[Amit Varma]: on what your school syllabus is and just teaching you to perform better at school.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, it is few to many, by few to many, I mean, it's a few people teaching many
[Amit Varma]: people.
[Amit Varma]: And to me, a good market should work differently.
[Amit Varma]: What I think is that over a period of time, and this is a problem to solve for young entrepreneurs
[Amit Varma]: who might be listening to this, I think we need a new model that incentivizes those who
[Amit Varma]: have knowledge to impart it to those who need that knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: And we also therefore need to create a mechanism of filtering, anybody should be able to teach
[Amit Varma]: anything if they feel they are able to, anybody should be able to kind of, you know, learn
[Amit Varma]: from them.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the way that we'll actually learn useful things.
[Amit Varma]: Like if I might be controversial, you know, whenever I hear about these outrageous college
[Amit Varma]: loans in the USA, and all this talk of forgiving them and all of that, you know, from my vantage
[Amit Varma]: point in India, it just seems to me that listen, if you've there's something wrong with the
[Amit Varma]: market if education is so expensive, that you have to take a loan and you cannot pay
[Amit Varma]: it back.
[Amit Varma]: Also, if what you are learning does not actually give you real world skills for you to earn
[Amit Varma]: the money very fast, that you spent learning it, something is broken in that whole system,
[Amit Varma]: and is possibly beyond my education to beyond my understanding to figure out where it is
[Amit Varma]: broken and how it can be fixed.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, it seems clear to me that many of these things that we take for granted that
[Amit Varma]: this is how learning and education should be structured, is something that we at least
[Amit Varma]: need to think about seriously.
[Amit Varma]: And you guys are the professionals, so what do you feel about this?
[Guest 1]: I think you're right.
[Guest 1]: And I think it's much even it's a really deep, deep, deep seeded problem.
[Guest 1]: Because here's the truth.
[Guest 1]: The private schools are really not much better.
[Guest 1]: That's the amazing thing, you know, I'll speak about the United States, but this is true
[Guest 1]: for India as well.
[Guest 1]: Yes, they're a little bit better about teaching, reading, writing arithmetic, you know, if
[Guest 1]: you have a choice, whatever it's done in the private school.
[Guest 1]: But in terms of innovation, in terms of using these new techniques, in teaching in a different
[Guest 1]: way, in teaching things which are more relevant to work, the private schools are no better.
[Guest 1]: So this is the case, I think, where something is so deep seeded, that the market, you know,
[Guest 1]: hasn't solved this problem.
[Guest 1]: Let me just give you a few examples, which have occurred to me, is like something I think
[Guest 1]: schools should teach is like memorization techniques, right?
[Guest 1]: This is probably something, Amit, you got from playing cards, right?
[Guest 1]: It's extremely useful to know, you know, what's on the deck, right?
[Guest 1]: What's on the table.
[Guest 1]: And there are techniques which people can use, you know, memory palaces, and so forth,
[Guest 1]: to vastly increase their ability to learn and retain material.
[Guest 1]: And yet nowhere is this kind of stuff taught, or fast math, right?
[Guest 1]: There are techniques to quickly multiply numbers and so forth, which can be taught.
[Guest 1]: But schools don't teach this stuff.
[Guest 1]: And like, why?
[Guest 1]: Why isn't there even just a few places which, you know, take a radically different approach?
[Guest 1]: It's very puzzling to me.
[Guest 1]: Part of it, I think, is that we say schooling is about education.
[Guest 1]: But what we see is, obviously, it's actually a lot of it is about warehousing, right?
[Guest 1]: The parents don't want to look after the kids, right?
[Guest 1]: And we see a lot of complaints about that right now, right?
[Guest 1]: People are complaining, you know, I can't go to work.
[Guest 1]: This is much more difficult for me, you know.
[Guest 1]: And I'm not discounting those complaints.
[Guest 1]: It is difficult to have kids at home all the time.
[Guest 1]: But a lot of what schooling does is just take the kids off the parents' hands for a while.
[Guest 1]: So the demanders are not as much interested in education as you might imagine.
[Guest 1]: But still, it is puzzling to me, Amit, why we don't see more radical experimentation
[Guest 1]: and innovation in teaching and education.
[Guest 2]: You know, speaking of learning useless things, I got an incredible education, I mean, compared
[Guest 2]: to 99% of Indians or maybe even more, right?
[Guest 2]: But I went to an all-girls, you know, Catholic-run, missionary-run school.
[Guest 2]: And I know how to knit.
[Guest 2]: I know how to sew.
[Guest 2]: I know how to crochet.
[Guest 2]: I know how to bake, right?
[Guest 2]: I could have sewn my own masks if the price was high enough and, you know, didn't surpass
[Guest 2]: my wages as an economist.
[Guest 2]: But I don't know how to code.
[Guest 2]: Because they were, you know, teaching us how to fold napkins and knit and turning us into
[Guest 2]: very well-educated, upper-class, elite housewives at some level, right?
[Guest 2]: So my job was to raise kids and knit their mittens.
[Guest 2]: It was not to know coding so that one day I can use Python to make graphs.
[Guest 2]: I still don't know how to do that.
[Guest 2]: I asked my research assistants to do it for me, right?
[Guest 2]: These young kids who just knew, who grew up coding, who just like do things 10 times faster
[Guest 2]: than I do them.
[Guest 2]: So there is, and I'm not that old, boys who are my counterparts in my generation were
[Guest 2]: taught how to code, right?
[Guest 2]: So first, I think there is this sense of, you know, this version of what kind of education
[Guest 2]: anyone needs, right?
[Guest 2]: There's this one size fits all, very centralized model.
[Guest 2]: If you're rich, you must need this kind of an education.
[Guest 2]: If you're female, you must be educated in this way, right?
[Guest 2]: If you want a great job, you must be educated in English.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, we have all these, you know, very standard methods of thinking about it.
[Guest 2]: So in India, the problem is complicated by the fact that we have like complete state
[Guest 2]: capture on curriculum, right?
[Guest 2]: So if in a marketplace, we might have had a little bit more, you know, experimentation
[Guest 2]: in the state, it's just, you know, dead, right?
[Guest 2]: They can barely master teaching kids, you know, numeracy and literacy, let alone experiment
[Guest 2]: in any way possible on other margins.
[Guest 2]: So I think one part of it is centralization, you know, one is, of course, centralization
[Guest 2]: by the state.
[Guest 2]: But there's also like this kind of group think in society, you know, they want all schools
[Guest 2]: to teach the same thing, right?
[Guest 2]: Because they think that's fair, it'll be all kids will get the same stuff.
[Guest 2]: Of course, they're not going to get the same stuff, right?
[Guest 2]: Economics are going to determine, right, IQ and parents income are going to determine
[Guest 2]: 90% of their lifetime and future outcomes, believe, you know, as unfair as that sounds.
[Guest 2]: So the birth lottery is why I do everything that I do, right?
[Guest 2]: The reasons I can't do some of the things that I learned how to knit, instead of code.
[Guest 2]: So I think there's that problem.
[Guest 2]: And we haven't quite figured out that we don't need this overly centralized system either
[Guest 2]: imposed socially, or imposed by the government.
[Guest 2]: And America is not that much different, you know, in one sense, our colleague, Judy, and
[Guest 1]: I know our friend, Brian Kaplan, has he been on the podcast?
[Amit Varma]: Not yet.
[Amit Varma]: But he should have inviting him because he has these incredible counterintuitive insights,
[Guest 1]: which always make me kind of sit back and think, yeah, yeah, he's very good.
[Guest 1]: He has two twins who are extremely studious.
[Guest 1]: Oh, yeah, and not so much interested in sports or things like this.
[Guest 1]: And he went around to a bunch of private schools and said, you know, here, my kids, look, they
[Guest 1]: don't want to do art.
[Guest 1]: They don't like it.
[Guest 1]: They don't want to do sports.
[Guest 1]: Can you just teach them some more mathematics?
[Guest 1]: And the private schools were, oh, oh, no, no, no, no, no, no.
[Guest 1]: We teach the whole kid, you know, we are holistic.
[Guest 1]: We could never do that.
[Guest 1]: You know, it's very important that we round them out, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
[Guest 1]: So we ended up homeschooling them, actually home office schooling them.
[Guest 1]: They were schooled literally in the office across the hall from me.
[Guest 2]: And they're well-rounded, they're intellectually well-rounded.
[Guest 2]: They may not know how to run, you know, whatever your PT exercises or some nonsense like that.
[Guest 2]: But they are very well-rounded kids.
[Guest 2]: I've seen them.
[Guest 2]: I mean, they were pretty young when I was in graduate school.
[Guest 2]: They must have been middle school.
[Guest 2]: But then they were pretty well-rounded then.
[Guest 1]: They have their first publication already as 18-year-olds.
[Guest 1]: Wow.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: Anyway, it's great.
[Guest 1]: But my point is that even in this private marketplace, he could not get a deviation
[Guest 1]: from even, you know, even a simple one, even when he was willing to pay.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: I mean, private schools are not cheap.
[Guest 1]: So here he is willing to give a private school, you know, tens of thousands of dollars, right,
[Guest 1]: to educate his kids.
[Guest 1]: And they could not deviate from the lesson plan.
[Guest 1]: So there's something about education, which is just, I don't understand it, actually.
[Guest 1]: But it's just very difficult to innovate and to break into the social, to change the social
[Guest 1]: dynamic.
[Guest 1]: And let alone, of course, we have all the problems with state intervention and not having
[Guest 1]: a market.
[Guest 1]: But even in the market, it's less than I would have expected.
[Guest 2]: You know, one personal anecdote here.
[Guest 2]: When I was about eight years old, my dad had to go on a fellowship to the Netherlands.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: And this was something related to work.
[Guest 2]: He had to spend seven or eight months in Netherlands.
[Guest 2]: My mother, who's a musician, was simultaneously invited to give a number of concerts, you know,
[Guest 2]: all across Europe.
[Guest 2]: And my parents were like, amazing.
[Guest 2]: They were troopers.
[Guest 2]: My mother at that time was about the age I am right now.
[Guest 2]: So, you know, more credit to her at this age, I'm able to appreciate her decision so much
[Guest 2]: more.
[Guest 2]: They could have left their kids with the grandparents and just taken off and spent eight months in
[Guest 2]: Europe.
[Guest 2]: And they said, no, we'll take the kids.
[Guest 2]: I have no idea why.
[Guest 2]: And they just yanked me and my sister out of school.
[Guest 2]: My sister was 11 at the time.
[Guest 2]: And we thought we were going to go to school in the Netherlands.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: And we were so excited about it because they don't have school uniforms.
[Guest 2]: They have cafeterias and lockers, you know, it looks like a school out of Archie Comics
[Guest 2]: or something like that.
[Guest 2]: And my sister and I were like over the moon that we might get to go to school there.
[Guest 2]: And my parents said, why do you want to go to go to school?
[Guest 2]: You learn more traveling across Europe with us.
[Guest 2]: And we thought they're insane.
[Guest 2]: Everyone.
[Guest 2]: My parents thought they were insane, yanking kids out of school for eight months.
[Guest 2]: We just toured with my mom.
[Guest 2]: That's it.
[Guest 2]: You know, I've toured like all over Western Europe.
[Guest 2]: We just went.
[Guest 2]: My mother was the opening act for a big, you know, Rupert follow up act.
[Guest 2]: And I've toured France for 31 days.
[Guest 2]: I've been to villages in France.
[Guest 2]: Normal people haven't been to.
[Guest 2]: But the education I got as an eight year old was the Vienna Symphony is different from
[Guest 2]: the Lund Philharmonic.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: That's it's a different kind of education, but it's the kind of education you get when
[Guest 2]: you travel and you see the world and you're with your parents.
[Guest 2]: And we came back and my parents just hired a tutor for us to like quickly pass the final
[Guest 2]: exams.
[Guest 2]: And we went on to the next grade.
[Guest 2]: And that was the end of that.
[Guest 2]: And nobody, you know, if my parents had been in India and they had yanked us out of school
[Guest 2]: to maybe travel across India, like that, that would have been the end of it.
[Guest 2]: Like, I think there would have been a family intervention.
[Guest 2]: They would have come and told my parents that we're taking your kids away.
[Guest 2]: You're terrible parents.
[Guest 2]: You have no idea what you're doing.
[Guest 2]: You're going to ruin their lives because they didn't learn like 12 times table or whatever.
[Guest 2]: And it's the amount of social pressure to get a particular kind of schooling for all
[Guest 2]: kids to get, you know, you know, all the typical right.
[Guest 2]: In addition to schooling, you should learn a musical instrument.
[Guest 2]: You should learn karate.
[Guest 2]: You should learn a foreign language.
[Guest 2]: I mean, these kids who learn the foreign language can't even order like food in French.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: It's just completely useless information.
[Guest 2]: My foreign language was Sanskrit, which is still foreign to me.
[Guest 2]: So it's just like there's some system we've come up with.
[Guest 2]: I have no idea when it might have ever been useful.
[Guest 2]: It's certainly not useful today.
[Guest 2]: And not only do we not have experimentation, anyone willing to experiment like Brian or
[Guest 2]: my parents, they are punished for it.
[Guest 2]: You know, like there is just outrageous amount of social sanction.
[Guest 2]: I, I don't imagine a lot of people outside of, you know, Carroll Hall support Brian's
[Guest 2]: choice to homeschool the kids or someone who knows the kids well, who know the twins well,
[Guest 2]: they might support that choice.
[Guest 2]: But everyone else will just think like these are insane parents.
[Guest 2]: And homeschoolers in the United States are typically vilified.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: They say you want to homeschool your kids because of religious education or something,
[Guest 2]: something like that.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: Because you don't want them to read Darwin or whatever the latest thing, political thing
[Guest 2]: is.
[Guest 2]: So it's mired in a lot of these things.
[Guest 2]: I have no answers on how to break out of it.
[Guest 2]: I thought the big MOOCs, you know, the Khan Academy and things like MRU, of course, which
[Guest 2]: is very much more niche.
[Guest 2]: I thought that might have picked up a bigger movement in homeschooling because it used
[Guest 2]: to be so costly to exit the state, you know, so on that margin, a lot of the costs of exiting
[Guest 2]: the state school system or the social schooling system have reduced.
[Guest 2]: And I imagined a bigger exodus than what actually happened.
[Guest 2]: But my sense is it's because of what Alex said, which is schools are acting like warehouses,
[Guest 2]: you know, where you put your kids for six hours so that you can get your work done because
[Guest 2]: we can't afford nannies and we don't have grandparents in the United States and, you
[Guest 2]: know, those kinds of things.
[Guest 2]: I was also raised by my grandparents.
[Guest 2]: So, you know, I mean, if Khan Academy was better, I can imagine my parents just putting
[Guest 2]: me in front of Khan Academy and doing whatever they needed to do.
[Guest 2]: They might have been experimental.
[Guest 2]: So I think there are multiple things going on.
[Guest 2]: Immigration can solve the warehousing problem.
[Guest 2]: We're very bad on immigration in the United States.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: You could have a lot of people from poorer countries who know how to raise kids really
[Guest 2]: well.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: Happy, well-rounded kids who are kind, good people.
[Guest 2]: They could be helping you raise your kids instead of warehousing them in a jail, a centralized
[Guest 2]: jail system wearing masks right now.
[Guest 2]: But that's not an option on the table because of bad immigration laws.
[Guest 2]: So it's not, I think, one thing that solves it.
[Guest 2]: It's not just the politics of education.
[Guest 2]: I think it's so many things about education.
[Guest 2]: It's our notion of fairness.
[Guest 2]: It's our notion of how children must be raised, where they must go.
[Guest 2]: No one should be left out.
[Guest 2]: No one should be left behind.
[Guest 2]: You know, all of those things mired in one.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess, you know, the fact that so many people homeschool at all tells you that the
[Amit Varma]: system is broken because homeschooling doesn't really make rational sense from a comparative
[Amit Varma]: advantage point of view.
[Amit Varma]: You're better off outsourcing that and just focusing on what you do.
[Amit Varma]: But the fact that so many parents who obviously care about the kids feel the need to do that
[Amit Varma]: is itself indicative.
[Amit Varma]: And I've often, you know, amused at putting, you know, with other people, putting together
[Amit Varma]: a sort of a course called life lessons, which teaches you all the basic things we should
[Amit Varma]: be taught in education, but aren't taught, for example, econ 101, you know, probabilistic
[Amit Varma]: thinking, how the brain works, communication, how to code, you know, like Alex said, memorization
[Amit Varma]: techniques or knowledge management, all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: Financial literacy.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: Financial literacy.
[Guest 2]: We are terrible at in the United States.
[Guest 2]: I have college kids who don't know how to balance a checkbook.
[Guest 2]: I mean, they don't know what that means, you know, to have to manage their own money and
[Guest 2]: how compound interest works when they are, there's a massive amount of student debt because
[Guest 2]: they have no conception of how big this is going to get.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: So compound interest is magical when you're an investor, right?
[Guest 2]: It's the devil for when you're a student in debt.
[Guest 2]: So just explaining those numbers to them, I mean, they need to even putting it in the
[Guest 2]: compound interest calculator.
[Guest 2]: It doesn't quite process until they see the, you know, the exponential curve of how much
[Guest 2]: they're going to have to pay the longer they have this going.
[Guest 2]: It's really hard.
[Guest 2]: The financial literacy part is one of the reasons we have such terrible levels of student
[Guest 2]: debt.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on now to Alex's third lesson of the day.
[Guest 1]: Okay.
[Guest 1]: So, you know, I'm going to now sort of contradict myself a little better because, you know,
[Guest 1]: you had Shruti and I on earlier and we talked about state capacity and India kind of as
[Guest 1]: a flailing state.
[Guest 1]: And I've changed my mind a little bit in the following sense is that at the beginning of
[Guest 1]: the pandemic, I thought the U.S. will, it'll be bad, but it'll probably be okay.
[Guest 1]: But I was very worried about India because already lots of pollution, lots of comorbidities,
[Guest 1]: I didn't, flailing state, you know, I was very, very concerned with India.
[Guest 1]: And in fact, what we know is that it's been much worse in the United States than in India.
[Guest 1]: India has done, has made mistakes, a lot of mistakes.
[Guest 1]: We can talk about that.
[Guest 1]: But India certainly has not done worse than the United States.
[Guest 1]: And so I'm less focused now on state capacity.
[Guest 1]: And then on what my colleague, Brian Kaplan, who was always somewhat skeptical about state
[Guest 1]: capacity, he calls state will, right?
[Guest 1]: And states have a lot of untapped power, which they can use, and sometimes they do, and sometimes
[Guest 1]: they choose not to.
[Guest 1]: So a lot of what happened in the United States, you could say it's low state capacity, but
[Guest 1]: actually it's probably just low state will.
[Guest 1]: The Trump administration in particular, but for a whole variety of reasons of complacency
[Guest 1]: and regulation and so forth, we just did not have the will.
[Guest 1]: You know, we just did not summon the will to do radical things, to make big, big steps,
[Guest 1]: to make big changes.
[Guest 1]: And India did.
[Guest 1]: So, you know, again, I'm not supportive of this, but India had the, you know, the biggest
[Guest 1]: lockdown.
[Guest 1]: India had capacity, India showed will, India made big moves.
[Guest 1]: So this idea of state capacity, I've sort of downgraded it a little bit in favor of
[Guest 1]: kind of state will.
[Guest 1]: And I don't always understand why some states, they have the will to make these big moves,
[Guest 1]: make these big changes.
[Guest 1]: China, for example, you know, has vaccinated more than a million people.
[Guest 1]: China did what you would think the United States would have done, you know, 50 years
[Guest 1]: ago.
[Guest 1]: They said, well, we're going to create a vaccine and we're going to start giving it out to
[Guest 1]: people even before we've gone through all the trials.
[Guest 1]: So China did a lot, a lot of capacity, a lot of action, but also a lot of will.
[Guest 1]: And the United States, you know, I spoke with people in Congress and they would just, well,
[Guest 1]: it's the next, we have to wait till the next session.
[Guest 1]: Things are slow.
[Guest 1]: We have to get agreement and, you know, there just wasn't the will there.
[Guest 1]: And it's odd because when we were attacked on 9-11, massive willpower, right?
[Guest 1]: I mean, there was no question that we were going to fight back and we were going to attack
[Guest 1]: whoever, the wrong people.
[Guest 1]: But yeah, I mean, but we had troops in Afghanistan, we had troops in Iraq, and we had just a massive,
[Guest 1]: massive, we'd spent trillions of dollars, okay?
[Guest 1]: We're still spending huge amounts of money fighting these crazy wars.
[Guest 1]: I mean, it was, we did the wrong thing, but there was no question when we were attacked
[Guest 1]: on 9-11 that the United States would respond, okay?
[Guest 1]: And yet today we have a 9-11 every single day, every single day right now, more people
[Guest 1]: are dying than in 9-11 and people, there's no action in government and there's no even
[Guest 1]: action among the people, right?
[Guest 1]: You know, I'm concerned, Shruti is concerned, but like where are the people rising in the
[Guest 1]: streets demanding that people stop dying in nursing homes?
[Guest 1]: We are nine months, ten months into the crisis and the nursing homes are still where people
[Guest 1]: are dying and we're not protecting them.
[Guest 1]: You know, in World War II, people sent their kids to the countryside.
[Guest 1]: You know, my father-in-law was sent from Holland, he was sent to England, you know, as a young
[Guest 1]: child.
[Guest 1]: His parents said, it's too dangerous here, we're going to send you, we have no idea exactly
[Guest 1]: where you're going, right?
[Guest 1]: We're going to send you off to the countryside in England to kind of protect you, right?
[Guest 1]: And yet today we cannot protect people in our nursing homes.
[Guest 1]: And I don't understand why, I don't understand why in some cases this triggers some part
[Guest 1]: of our brain, oh, we've been attacked, we must fight back.
[Guest 1]: And yet when the virus attacks us, we don't fight back.
[Guest 1]: This is puzzling to me.
[Guest 1]: And it's to do with this, it also has this question of state capacity versus state will.
[Guest 1]: And I think state will seems to be more powerful than I had thought previously.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of thoughts, which are also kind of questions.
[Amit Varma]: One is, could it be the case that, you know, in terms of 9-11, what's happening is much
[Amit Varma]: more visible.
[Amit Varma]: You watch it on television and you see those flaming towers and, you know, it's much more
[Amit Varma]: visible and therefore the reaction is much more visceral.
[Amit Varma]: And also the enemy is identifiable, you know, it is that bunch of specific people who have
[Amit Varma]: photographs and all that, the virus in that sense is kind of much more abstract.
[Amit Varma]: And as far as, you know, state will is concerned as against state capacity, and I'm just thinking
[Amit Varma]: aloud here, would it be the case that for a politician, action will always carry more
[Amit Varma]: costs than inaction, because when you do something, you can cause something bad to happen.
[Amit Varma]: But if you just stay with the status quo, when you don't do anything, at least you didn't
[Amit Varma]: cause the bad thing to happen, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So is that therefore inherently a bias towards inaction built in for politicians and the
[Guest 1]: state?
[Guest 1]: You would have thought that.
[Guest 1]: And yet, you know, we sent troops to, as I said, to Afghanistan and Iraq, which is mired
[Guest 1]: us in now the longest war in US history.
[Guest 1]: And so there the bias was towards action, right?
[Guest 1]: And sometimes, so I don't always understand, like, why is it in some cases we are very
[Guest 1]: quick to act, even foolishly quick, and, you know, demonetization in India and also, you
[Guest 1]: know, sending everybody in India back to the villages, right?
[Guest 1]: So that was a huge action, right?
[Guest 1]: And probably mistaken action, but they had the will to do it and they did it, they did
[Guest 1]: it, right?
[Guest 1]: So it is, I think this is one of the big questions in social science is when is there a bias
[Guest 1]: towards action and when is there is a bias towards the status quo?
[Guest 1]: And to try and understand this, I think is very puzzling.
[Guest 2]: You know, this is also related to one of my lessons, but I'll get to that in a minute.
[Guest 2]: But first to respond to what Amit said, Amit, I would have agreed with you if you had talked
[Guest 2]: about, say, the contrast between 9-11 and diabetes, right?
[Guest 2]: Diabetes is the slow killer, you know, people have it.
[Guest 2]: You can kind of survive with it for a while, even though your standard of living is poorer
[Guest 2]: or whatever.
[Guest 2]: But, you know, the 9-11 is this visceral event, it plays in your head over and over again,
[Guest 2]: and it's terrifying.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, there's a certain fantastical element about it that doesn't leave your mind.
[Guest 2]: But I do think COVID is like that.
[Guest 2]: We are trapped in our homes in some bizarre, like social biological experiment.
[Guest 2]: Our friends are in hospitals.
[Guest 2]: You know, we know people, we've all had friends, family members.
[Guest 2]: I have family members right now who are COVID positive, right, who are complaining about
[Guest 2]: losing their sense of smell and taste, and I can't talk to them because they are coughing
[Guest 2]: up a storm, right?
[Guest 2]: We all know people who've lost parents, who've lost grandparents.
[Guest 2]: The death count is what, about 300,000 right now?
[Guest 2]: So this is no longer a tiny tragedy, right?
[Guest 2]: And nor is it...
[Guest 2]: And you go out, everyone's wearing a mask, right?
[Guest 2]: So this is bizarre, right?
[Guest 2]: What a bizarre world.
[Guest 2]: You can't enter places.
[Guest 2]: You can't go and access half the places in the same way one would have.
[Guest 2]: It's winter right now here, right?
[Guest 2]: We have below zero Celsius temperatures all the time.
[Guest 2]: So we can't exactly get together outdoors and, you know, have a cup of coffee and pretend
[Guest 2]: like things are okay for a moment.
[Guest 2]: It's really hard.
[Guest 2]: Like, you know, none of us is going to get together for Christmas, for instance, right?
[Guest 2]: These are not low cost events.
[Guest 2]: They're very visible.
[Guest 2]: They're not like diabetes.
[Guest 2]: They're not like, you know, driving or drowning or vending machine deaths, you know, all those
[Guest 2]: other things we normally compare to 9-11.
[Guest 2]: This is really big.
[Guest 2]: And somehow, I don't know if it's the human ability to adapt, but people seem to have
[Guest 2]: adjusted to these numbers as the new normal.
[Guest 2]: No one seems to be outraged.
[Guest 2]: No one has a sense of urgency.
[Guest 2]: I know a few economists like Alex or, you know, Paul Romer, John Cochran, who constantly,
[Guest 2]: you know, writing and posting with a sense of urgency and panic of, you know, what the
[Guest 2]: hell are we doing?
[Guest 2]: But most people are pretty calm about it in the narrative, which is something that's really
[Guest 2]: worrying.
[Guest 2]: Like, you know, this is not a situation to be calm.
[Guest 2]: The lesson that I learned, which is a little bit related to what Alex said, but slightly
[Guest 2]: different, is I am deeply disappointed in self-interested politicians.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: I mean, there are some massive low hanging fruits which you could just go for, like,
[Guest 2]: you know, in this emergency situation, you could really go up the situation to your benefit.
[Guest 2]: You know, you could be Winston Churchill who furthered every single agenda of his while
[Guest 2]: also furthering British interests in the war.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: For instance, Prime Minister Modi was interested in, like, you know, India's health care and
[Guest 2]: providing some kind of health insurance and things like that.
[Guest 2]: Even before the pandemic, they announced a half hearted plan, a huge plan, you know,
[Guest 2]: in the budget for last year and the year before that.
[Guest 2]: This is the moment to seize.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: And say, you know what?
[Guest 2]: I will be the person like Nehru who built Bhakranagar dam or the IITs or something.
[Guest 2]: I'm the person who will make this massive, you know, investment or intervention in health
[Guest 2]: care policy.
[Guest 2]: He might get it right.
[Guest 2]: He might get it wrong.
[Guest 2]: But this was sort of like the perfect opportunity to brand something Indians really care about,
[Guest 2]: you know, co-opt all the finances at a war footing towards that particular agenda.
[Guest 2]: And he already had this agenda.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: And they are still nowhere on the plan to do this.
[Guest 2]: Why do we see Prime Minister Modi come and say, you know, ICMR is very slow when it comes
[Guest 2]: to approving testing.
[Guest 2]: I'm going to scale up India's testing, you know, 800 fold.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: Where is that announcement?
[Guest 2]: So it's not just like political will.
[Guest 2]: I'm also like, are these politicians not genuinely self-interested?
[Guest 2]: Do they not care about PR?
[Guest 2]: Do they not care about maximizing their budget?
[Guest 2]: You know, all the things Gordon Tullock would have taught us, they're failing on every single
[Guest 2]: one of them.
[Guest 2]: They're not even good self-interested politicians.
[Guest 2]: They are bad politicians, not in the usual sense.
[Guest 2]: So I am very disappointed on that margin.
[Guest 2]: I expected at least one Winston Churchill to come, you know, awful as he was.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: But I expected one leader like that somewhere in the world to, you know, make like crazy
[Guest 2]: outrageous statements and completely co-opt this tragedy to their benefit.
[Guest 2]: And also, you know, maybe some good would have come out of it.
[Guest 1]: But I just haven't seen it.
[Guest 1]: Come in in the United States.
[Guest 1]: I mean, Donald Trump could easily have won reelection, right, had he just displayed competence
[Guest 1]: in even just one area of handling the pandemic.
[Guest 1]: It's very peculiar because he did Operation Warp Speed.
[Guest 1]: And but why wasn't there a similar program for testing?
[Guest 1]: You know, there was a plan actually using the post office to send out masks to every
[Guest 1]: single household in the United States.
[Guest 1]: And, you know, taking action like that, I think Donald Trump would have won, would have
[Guest 1]: won reelection easily.
[Guest 1]: I mean, most incumbents win.
[Guest 1]: He came extremely, extremely close.
[Guest 1]: And yet just taking these very basic actions, he didn't even want to stimulate the economy
[Guest 1]: until, you know, very late, even though that was totally in his interest.
[Guest 1]: So very, very puzzling to me.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one of the things that we often talk about and worry about is that during
[Amit Varma]: a crisis, leaders will take the opportunity to kind of consolidate state power.
[Amit Varma]: And that's only a bad thing in the long run.
[Amit Varma]: And my response to that in the context of India is that, listen, our state is too incompetent
[Amit Varma]: to do that properly.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, so in a sense, it's a damn good thing that these people haven't shown that
[Amit Varma]: kind of leadership because it would have manifested in the wrong kinds of things.
[Amit Varma]: So is that the big lesson here?
[Amit Varma]: Like is your fourth lesson, Shruti, really that really about the incompetence of the
[Guest 2]: state?
[Guest 2]: My fourth lesson is my priors about politicians have had to really change, right?
[Guest 2]: As a public choice economist, right?
[Guest 2]: The constant thing we are thinking about is politicians are rational, self-interested
[Guest 2]: people.
[Guest 2]: They can't be trusted with power.
[Guest 2]: We must keep checking their power, even if it is at the, you know, tradeoff of slowing
[Guest 2]: things down or making things incompetent.
[Guest 2]: Only in extreme emergencies like war and a global pandemic must we give them even a little
[Guest 2]: bit of leeway.
[Guest 2]: And I'm like, frankly, they have all the leeway, they're just not doing anything with it.
[Guest 2]: My lesson is I have had to seriously think about and revise my priors about self-interested
[Guest 2]: politicians and how they behave, right?
[Guest 2]: Somehow inaction in a pandemic doesn't seem to hurt their prospects very much, or even
[Guest 2]: if it will hurt their prospects, they don't want to be seen doing very much.
[Guest 2]: And I can't figure out why.
[Guest 2]: I just can't figure out why they wouldn't co-opt this, you know, in their peculiar way.
[Guest 2]: Like, for instance, if I were doing vaccine research right now, I would completely co-opt
[Guest 2]: this emergency, even if the research I was doing was not on coronavirus, right?
[Guest 2]: I'd be like, oh, my God, see, the world comes to a standstill if you don't have one vaccine.
[Guest 2]: You want to spend lots of money on vaccines and, you know, start this whole rent-seeking.
[Guest 2]: I don't see any of that happening.
[Guest 2]: So the way I would have thought, like, your classic Gordon Tullock politician would have
[Guest 2]: reacted, they just, I can't find a single example of anyone reacting like that.
[Guest 2]: And I don't know enough about, you know, more specific Chinese politics.
[Guest 2]: If there were, in fact, more local leaders who might have done something like that in
[Guest 2]: the Communist Party, but outside in the Western world and in India, I just don't see it.
[Amit Varma]: They're not making dictators like they used to.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess it's a blessing that, you know, they're not acting rationally to consolidate
[Amit Varma]: power as, you know, a theory predicts they should.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess that's a blessing for us.
[Amit Varma]: But I would at this point coin a new axiom, which I will call Verma's razor, never attribute
[Amit Varma]: to virtue what can be adequately explained by stupidity.
[Guest 2]: No, but it's not virtuous either.
[Guest 2]: It is, I believe it might be a misunderstanding of the low hanging fruit and self-interest.
[Guest 2]: Either they are misunderstanding it or I'm misunderstanding it.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: My understanding would have been there's a huge coalition to support investments in health
[Guest 2]: care in India.
[Guest 2]: Maybe I'm wrong.
[Guest 2]: Maybe that coalition doesn't exist.
[Guest 2]: And that's why they didn't capitalize on it.
[Guest 2]: But the low hanging fruit, according to me, nobody went for.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: And same in the US.
[Guest 1]: Like, you know, we talked a lot about Trump, but in Congress, you know, either in the Senate
[Guest 1]: or they're the ones who are supposed to be passing the law.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: And so where here is an incredible opportunity for a politician like somebody like an AOC,
[Guest 1]: for example, to brand this as her issue and to put forward a plan and to rise in the national,
[Guest 1]: you know, rankings as the anti-Trump or something like that.
[Guest 1]: And that never happened.
[Guest 1]: That never happened.
[Guest 1]: There's no like Biden.
[Guest 1]: He's not really even it's not I mean, he won because people voted against Trump.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: They voted against Trump.
[Guest 1]: But Biden was never the anti-Trump in, you know, in any sense.
[Guest 1]: And, you know, he came he won, I think, because he was, again, actually the candidate who
[Guest 1]: was least interested in big change.
[Guest 1]: And in one sense, I'm grateful for that, you know, because the change that the other candidates
[Guest 1]: were interested in was almost all bad.
[Guest 1]: So I'm grateful that the Democrats chose a candidate whom, you know, I could support
[Guest 1]: because he was sort of the more rational, conservative candidate.
[Guest 1]: So it was very peculiar that there was no coalition or no coalescence around a alternative
[Guest 1]: plan to Trump.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: So if this is something an AOC or somebody like that could have taken up, here is the
[Guest 1]: plan that we're going to deal with the pandemic.
[Guest 1]: And here are the law.
[Guest 1]: Let's pass the law.
[Guest 1]: I mean, Congress is supposed to be the ones to be passing the law.
[Guest 1]: And yet that never happened.
[Guest 1]: There was still the focus of everybody, everyone who wanted big changes.
[Guest 1]: The focus was on all on these cultural issues, all on, you know, raising the minimum wage
[Guest 1]: or, you know, something fixing national health care or something like that.
[Guest 1]: There was no big plan on the pandemic.
[Guest 1]: And again, it just seems very peculiar to me, like in a war, right?
[Guest 1]: You know, if the war isn't going well, you expect the opposition party to have a different
[Guest 1]: plan for the war, not to run on raising the minimum wage while we're losing the war.
[Guest 1]: And yet that's exactly what happened.
[Guest 1]: It was like the Democrats were running on all of these cultural issues and, you know,
[Guest 1]: economic distribution, redistribution issues while we're losing the war against the pandemic.
[Guest 1]: And so why that didn't become the national issue, again, very strange to me.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll move on to my fourth lesson now, because that's again about politics and kind of a
[Amit Varma]: natural segue from this, which is that, again, it's not something that is a new and it's
[Amit Varma]: something that's been commented upon before this, even by me.
[Amit Varma]: But I think this year kind of really brought it home in terms of number one, of course,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there is a banal fact that politics has become more and more polarized, partly,
[Amit Varma]: you know, driven by social media.
[Amit Varma]: Alex, you earlier spoke of what Cass Sunstein called group polarization, that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: once you form your little tribe or your little echo chamber, you become more shrill and you
[Amit Varma]: go more towards the extremes.
[Amit Varma]: And we have indeed reverted to that kind of tribalism.
[Amit Varma]: But what is also kind of worrying here is that politics, I'm increasingly beginning
[Amit Varma]: to realize, is not just driven mainly by tribalism, but possibly only by tribalism in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that if you look at, for example, over the last four years, how the Republican Party
[Amit Varma]: was basically completely demolished by Trump and just became something other than what
[Amit Varma]: it was, where it was earlier the party which would stand up for free trade and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, look what happened to it.
[Amit Varma]: It was that just it was a will to power that mattered and not the principles you stood
[Amit Varma]: for.
[Amit Varma]: And politicians everywhere, of course, we know that when you enter politics is the art
[Amit Varma]: of compromise.
[Amit Varma]: You want to get to power and it does corrode character and whatever principles you may
[Amit Varma]: have started out with means nothing.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you imagine that parties stood for something and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And in India, of course, on the spectrum, all parties are pretty much the same.
[Amit Varma]: They are, you know, illiberal on economics, illiberal on social issues.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just a question of degree and nuances and details.
[Amit Varma]: But what I have also seen is that this is not just true of politicians.
[Amit Varma]: This is also true of voters who support political parties.
[Amit Varma]: Like, if you just see people's different reactions to the lockdown in the US, Trump was against
[Amit Varma]: a lockdown.
[Amit Varma]: So people who are on the left, therefore, you know, would naturally be for it.
[Amit Varma]: And in India, it was the other way around that Modi called for a lockdown.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, it kind of goes the other way, which is bizarre, because typically before
[Amit Varma]: that you have, you know, Modi supporters also being Trump supporters.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, you know, as someone who has written about policy, edited a magazine on policy,
[Amit Varma]: my sense always was that you have to evaluate a policy on its own terms.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't matter who's bringing it out.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, after, you know, decades of, you know, all parties agreeing at an intellectual
[Amit Varma]: level that our labor laws need to be reformed, that agriculture needs to be reformed, when
[Amit Varma]: some kind of reforms, even if they were flawed in a limited sense, but broadly a move in
[Amit Varma]: the right direction, when some kind of reforms are brought out by governments, which, you
[Amit Varma]: know, people like us otherwise oppose, you had a lot of people reflexively opposing those
[Amit Varma]: policies only because they are against a party in question.
[Amit Varma]: And for example, in the farm bills, you know, the Congress has had very similar measures
[Amit Varma]: on their manifesto, when AAP ran a previous state election, they had very similar things
[Amit Varma]: on their manifesto.
[Amit Varma]: You know, all experts in the field before this have all unanimously agreed that these
[Amit Varma]: are the reforms we need.
[Amit Varma]: We need to empower farmers with choice, remove the monopoly of these middlemen, so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And yet now, because of the politics of it, you completely ignore, you know, and it's
[Amit Varma]: so predictable now that when I talk about politics with someone, you know, if they are
[Amit Varma]: against party A and for party B, they will not be able to tell me one good thing that
[Amit Varma]: party A has done, because they're against the party, or one bad thing that the politician
[Amit Varma]: they admire has done.
[Amit Varma]: Because again, you know, so A, it's tribal, and it almost takes on sort of a religious
[Amit Varma]: level of belief.
[Amit Varma]: And if this is the case, if all our stands and our positions are going to be determined
[Amit Varma]: by this kind of reflexive tribalism, then where is the open debate, where is the discourse
[Amit Varma]: going?
[Amit Varma]: And this kind of has, in a sense, 2020, of course, has made people lose hope in many
[Amit Varma]: other dimensions.
[Amit Varma]: But I have lost hope of our politics ever really being reformed or, you know, because
[Amit Varma]: it's not just the politicians who don't care about principles, it's everybody else as well.
[Guest 1]: That's tribal.
[Guest 1]: And there's also this massive gaslighting, which goes on, in that people act like whatever
[Guest 1]: we're doing at this very moment has always been this way.
[Guest 1]: So this bizarre thing happened in the United States, where at the beginning of the crisis,
[Guest 1]: it was the liberals who were saying, don't worry about it.
[Guest 1]: This is just like the flu, okay, there's not going to be any problems.
[Guest 1]: We don't need a travel, you know, shutdown.
[Guest 1]: And it was the conservatives who were saying, no, we need a shutdown from China, we need
[Guest 1]: to have a travel shutdown, as Trump did.
[Guest 1]: And it was the conservatives on Twitter, you know, there were some libertarian types and
[Guest 1]: some radical types who actually had this early on, like Balaji Srinivasan.
[Guest 1]: And these guys were ahead of the curve.
[Guest 1]: And then within a matter of weeks, it really bizarrely just suddenly shifted while the
[Guest 1]: conservatives who had been warning about this, it suddenly became, oh, no, no, no, no, that's
[Guest 1]: not our tribe.
[Guest 1]: Our tribe has decided, Trump has decided that our tribe is going to be anti-mask, is going
[Guest 1]: to be anti-virus, is going to pretend that this isn't happening.
[Guest 1]: And they all switched.
[Guest 1]: And same with the liberals.
[Guest 1]: So like the liberals right now, like on Twitter, like right now, you know, you know, going
[Guest 1]: on about the CDC, all kinds of stuff, I won't get into it.
[Guest 1]: It's completely the opposite of what they were saying, you know, eight months ago, right?
[Guest 1]: They've completely changed from eight months ago.
[Guest 1]: And what is more, there's a gaslighting in that there's never any acknowledgement that,
[Guest 1]: hey, you, eight months ago, were saying this is not going to be a big deal, that we don't
[Guest 1]: need, we shouldn't overreact, that Trump is using this, you know, to gain political power.
[Guest 1]: That's what you were saying eight months ago, Mr. Epidemiologist, you know, Mr. Scientific
[Guest 1]: Expert.
[Guest 1]: This is what you were telling us, this is what you were advising the public.
[Guest 1]: You were telling the public eight months ago, don't worry about masks.
[Guest 1]: You don't need masks, okay?
[Guest 1]: Masks are just for doctors.
[Guest 1]: You don't need them.
[Guest 1]: It's not going to be a problem.
[Guest 1]: You know, it's not where the flu kills 30,000 people a year.
[Guest 1]: So don't worry about this.
[Guest 1]: It's only going to be like, you know, 100 people, you know, like, well, that's what
[Guest 1]: you were saying eight months ago.
[Guest 1]: And now you're all blah, blah, blah.
[Guest 1]: And there's, and I don't mind that.
[Guest 1]: Look, look, people should change their mind, right?
[Guest 1]: Okay.
[Guest 1]: You know, we should be Bayesians.
[Guest 1]: People should change their mind when the evidence changes.
[Guest 1]: So I'm not criticizing them for changing their mind.
[Guest 1]: What I am criticizing is that they now think that to hold the opposite view is like evil.
[Guest 1]: And that's the view they had just eight months ago.
[Guest 1]: You know, you must be stupid or evil to have this.
[Guest 1]: And there's no recognition that they themselves have completely changed their mind and reversed
[Guest 1]: course.
[Guest 1]: And it's just a massive gaslighting, which goes on in both sides.
[Guest 1]: Both sides do it, right?
[Guest 1]: There's no, you know, Trump at the same time wants to say, you know, we shut down against
[Guest 1]: China because we knew the pandemic was going to be important.
[Guest 1]: And at the same time, so it's not important, you know, just go back to work, right?
[Guest 1]: I mean, so these cultural things, as exactly as you say, they're tribal and the speed at
[Guest 1]: which the tribe can shift.
[Guest 1]: It's like those birds, the murmuration, right, you know, they're flying one way and they're
[Guest 1]: going the other way.
[Guest 1]: And woe, you know, and if you don't follow your tribe, you know, woe to you, right?
[Guest 1]: Because if you're the one bird which doesn't know to turn when every other bird turns,
[Guest 1]: you know, then you are going to become evil and you're going to be attacked by your tribe.
[Guest 1]: And they're going to say that you're stupid, you're evil, you're, you know, how could you
[Guest 1]: possibly think this?
[Guest 1]: And if you don't stick with your tribe, you're crushed, you're crushed.
[Guest 2]: And that's the craziness of it all.
[Guest 2]: You know, there's another aspect to it.
[Guest 2]: So this is in particular, I don't want to name names, but some of it might be clear.
[Guest 2]: We've had, like you said, you know, economists, experts who supported the farm bills when
[Guest 2]: it was a previous government who no longer supported or were at least hedging, you know,
[Guest 2]: and saying, oh, but it's this issue of contract enforcement or something, you know, there's
[Guest 2]: all this stuff that keeps coming up.
[Guest 2]: They're very good economists, right?
[Guest 2]: I cannot imagine them saying this in the classroom, right?
[Guest 2]: But I think everyone does somewhere have to worry about, you know, where their next gig
[Guest 2]: comes from, right?
[Guest 2]: And you know, this goes back to an earlier point that Alex said about this whole collectivization
[Guest 2]: of all decision making, right?
[Guest 2]: Now, if you collectivize all decision making and everything is political and everything
[Guest 2]: is democratic, it also means everything is partisan, right?
[Guest 2]: Because that's how we are choosing in politics, right?
[Guest 2]: In the United States, it's a particularly acute version.
[Guest 2]: It's a duopoly, right?
[Guest 2]: In other parts of the world, it's a little less so.
[Guest 2]: Maybe there are a few more parties involved.
[Guest 2]: But the moment you collectivize decisions, it will become partisan and it will become
[Guest 2]: tribal.
[Guest 2]: Now, I can support labor law, even if it is coming from the stables of Yogi Adityanath,
[Guest 2]: who I otherwise abhor, because my bills are paid thanks to the Mercatus Center, right?
[Guest 2]: I don't have to worry about the BJP or the Congress or up hiring me in any position in
[Guest 2]: any way, right?
[Guest 2]: And my next meal is not contingent on them.
[Guest 2]: And I can be completely independent.
[Guest 2]: I also don't live in India, which means I know that the mob is not going to come and
[Guest 2]: break my windows, you know, the way they do with Siddharth Bhairavarajan or something
[Guest 2]: like that.
[Guest 2]: So there's a reason, right?
[Guest 2]: It is academics.
[Guest 2]: It is people in tenured positions, Michael Kramer, John Cochran, Paul Romer, Alex Tabarrok,
[Guest 2]: who are saying these things, right?
[Guest 2]: They don't have to rely on the government as experts for their next paycheck or, you
[Guest 2]: know, rely on the Republican Party to appoint them to whatever nonsense post that there
[Guest 2]: is within their government.
[Guest 2]: Most other pundits do, right?
[Guest 2]: And even if they're not directly working for the government, they are pundits in the sense
[Guest 2]: that, you know, they're going to be invited by MSNBC or Fox, right?
[Guest 2]: So to get your next gig, you have to do what you have to do.
[Guest 2]: So I think this might be more deeply entwined to just the way we think of decision making
[Guest 2]: than like this current moment of, I don't, what I mean is I don't think it's related
[Guest 2]: to the pandemic.
[Guest 2]: I think this is true of the war, right?
[Guest 2]: Nobody on the liberal side said anything when Obama was killing thousands of civilians with
[Guest 2]: drones, right?
[Guest 2]: I just read Obama's, you know, the autobiography, and I thought it's going to have like this
[Guest 2]: big thoughtful chapter on, you know, I really spent sleepless nights over all those civilians
[Guest 2]: who were bombed.
[Guest 2]: But you know, this is what I was thinking at the time, nothing, right?
[Guest 2]: Like I mean, not nothing, it's acknowledged, but there's no nuanced articulation of that's
[Guest 2]: what I thought at the time.
[Guest 2]: I've changed my mind, or maybe I haven't changed my mind, nothing, right?
[Guest 2]: And nobody seems to think that Obama has a bad record on war, right?
[Guest 2]: Because in their tribal world, Bush is bad record on war.
[Guest 2]: The other side, our side, good record on war, right?
[Guest 2]: So my problem with Obama is not healthcare, all the usual stuff conservatives are going
[Guest 2]: on about.
[Guest 2]: Obama has been terrible on foreign policy when it comes to killing civilians, just sheer
[Guest 2]: numbers.
[Guest 2]: But again, like, you know, so the gaslighting, I don't think it's COVID related.
[Guest 2]: I don't even think it's 2020 related.
[Guest 2]: But it's very stark right now, because we are trapped at home.
[Guest 2]: And the social media version of the movement of the birds, it's really something like,
[Guest 2]: you wake up one morning and up is down and down is up.
[Guest 2]: And now everything is different, right?
[Guest 2]: This has happened with the defunding the police and unbundling the police or support for the
[Guest 2]: police, right?
[Guest 2]: I mean, the Democrats support police unions in a really big way, right?
[Guest 2]: Not just the Republicans.
[Guest 2]: The Democrats are union people.
[Guest 2]: That's the party and built its bones on unions, right?
[Guest 2]: Our current vice president, right, or vice president elect made her bones supporting
[Guest 2]: police unions.
[Guest 2]: So now suddenly that side becomes the face of like, you know, we must defund the police
[Guest 2]: and we're anti police brutality.
[Guest 2]: It's all it's everything.
[Guest 2]: It's the pandemic.
[Guest 2]: It's every single major issue from war to education, to police brutality in the United
[Guest 2]: States.
[Guest 2]: And I don't see any way out of it.
[Guest 2]: And I don't see any way out of it in India either.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, this mass movement of the birds is quite hilarious.
[Amit Varma]: And what Alex just said about the gaslighting in the sense that if you have a different
[Amit Varma]: opinion, you are evil, period.
[Amit Varma]: That's the end of the matter.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, you're scared of, you know, sometimes I'll think twice about saying something
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter, because everyone's kind of going to just jump.
[Amit Varma]: And luckily, the kind of people who listen to the podcast are much more nuanced and reasonable.
[Amit Varma]: So I guess there's a sort of a selection effect inherent in that, which is quite delightful.
[Amit Varma]: So we have four more lessons to go through.
[Amit Varma]: So Alex, it's time for your fourth lesson.
[Guest 1]: Let me go with a positive one.
[Guest 1]: And that is the Internet.
[Guest 1]: It's even better and greater and more fantastic than I thought.
[Guest 1]: I'm shocked that it is actually held up.
[Guest 1]: So I thought or I wouldn't have been surprised with everybody at home, you know, watching
[Guest 1]: Netflix and working from home, I would not have been at all surprised if we had been
[Guest 1]: faced with Internet, you know, bugginess and collapsing all the time and shortages and
[Guest 1]: like the, you know, trying to use too much electricity, brownouts or the equivalent of
[Guest 1]: that slagginess slowing down.
[Guest 1]: And yet the Internet has been like rock solid.
[Guest 1]: You know, everyone's watching movies and I haven't had a single, you know, major, major
[Guest 1]: problem.
[Guest 1]: The Internet has been like totally rock solid.
[Guest 1]: I've been enjoying, you know, my Netflix and the chess thing and all that kind of stuff.
[Guest 1]: So it's been great.
[Guest 1]: And we have been able to work from home.
[Guest 1]: And a lot of us, I mean, not everyone, of course, but the ability to do that.
[Guest 1]: And I'm sort of reminded there's kind of a famous study of which looked at people's commuting
[Guest 1]: decisions in London and how they got to work.
[Guest 1]: And then for a while, because of a terrorist attack, some of the tube stations in London
[Guest 1]: were closed down and people had to find a new way to get to work.
[Guest 1]: And then the stations were opened up again.
[Guest 1]: And what they discovered is that a significant minority of people, like 25 percent, they
[Guest 1]: did not go back to the old commuting route that they had taken before.
[Guest 1]: And instead they stuck with the new route.
[Guest 1]: So that indicates that they needed this big shock to try something new and that the new
[Guest 1]: route was actually better, you know, save them some time or something like that.
[Guest 1]: And so I think that work from home, we're not all going to, you know, return back to,
[Guest 1]: you know, working at the office.
[Guest 1]: Some of us are going to stay working at home because it's worked better than we expected.
[Guest 1]: You know, it is by no means, you know, Zoom is a problem, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
[Guest 1]: We can go on about all Zoom fatigue, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
[Guest 1]: But it has worked better than I think anyone would have expected in advance.
[Guest 1]: So for example, this now is the season of interviewing job market candidates for economists.
[Guest 1]: And we all used to travel to like Atlanta or Chicago and go into hotels and people would
[Guest 1]: come.
[Guest 1]: You spend all day in a stinking hotel room and, you know, your job market candidates
[Guest 1]: would come one at a time, half an hour each, and you'd interview 10 of them or 20 of them
[Guest 1]: at the AEA, the annual AEA meetings.
[Guest 1]: I'm never doing that again.
[Guest 1]: The Zoom works just fine.
[Guest 1]: You know, we can interview job market candidates online.
[Guest 1]: I'm never going back.
[Guest 1]: And I think a lot of people are going to be in a similar kind of situation.
[Guest 1]: We needed this big push, but it has worked better than expected.
[Guest 1]: It's more solid than expected.
[Guest 1]: And we're going to even see bigger changes than you might have thought.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, that's a bonus lesson that I didn't put into my five, but that was among
[Amit Varma]: the contenders is that we are almost in a sense lucky that this pandemic happened in
[Amit Varma]: 2020 and not say 2005 because technology now allows so much like I'm being able to do so
[Amit Varma]: much of my remote podcasting without a hitch.
[Amit Varma]: And what I, you know, tell the students of my podcasting course also is that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the basic budget equipment that you need to start podcasting is what would have been considered
[Amit Varma]: studio quality 20 years ago.
[Amit Varma]: You can get professional quality output, whether it is an audio or even video without investing
[Amit Varma]: too much.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there are films being shot with the iPhone for God's sake, of course, the iPhone
[Amit Varma]: is hardly cheap and I don't have one either.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you know, the three of us are incredibly privileged that we can work from
[Amit Varma]: home productively and we are extremely lucky that way.
[Amit Varma]: And so many people don't have that choice, but it is something to note that the technology
[Amit Varma]: has come to this point that many of us are realizing that we don't need to go back to
[Amit Varma]: the old way of life.
[Amit Varma]: We can be much more efficient, I guess, just being at home.
[Amit Varma]: Like I was thinking, maybe, you know, I was telling Shruti the other day that next year
[Amit Varma]: I want to try out streaming and just kind of throw things at the wall and see what happens.
[Amit Varma]: And I've realized while researching it that it's really cheap.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I don't need a television studio.
[Amit Varma]: I don't need a production house.
[Amit Varma]: It's literally doable on my own if I, you know, kind of show the will, which a state
[Amit Varma]: doesn't.
[Amit Varma]: But thankfully, I'm not the state.
[Amit Varma]: I'm an individual.
[Amit Varma]: So, yeah, but that's been a revelation indeed.
[Guest 2]: I think it's also like Nandu, my husband, who both of you know, was joking with me the
[Guest 2]: other day.
[Guest 2]: And he said, I think you are a little too well-adjusted for pandemic life, like in terms
[Guest 2]: of choice of job and luck and temperament and everything.
[Guest 2]: He's actually worried about me rejoining normal society.
[Guest 2]: He says, what are you going to do then?
[Guest 2]: And I mean, some of this has an element of privilege, but it's also luck, right?
[Guest 2]: I mean, doctors are incredibly privileged, but they find themselves on the front lines
[Guest 2]: right now.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: I mean, the New York Philharmonic musicians are incredibly privileged, but they are out
[Guest 2]: of a job right now.
[Guest 2]: So I think, I mean, the pandemic has also hurt the privileged and the elite, not just
[Guest 2]: poor people, but it's just pure chance that I happen to be a professional economist in
[Guest 2]: 2020, you know, and this happened to me right now.
[Guest 2]: It's just luck, dumb luck, you know, and it's very hard to counter dumb luck like that.
[Guest 2]: I mean, the next thing could affect my age group, it could affect my gender, it could
[Guest 2]: affect South Asians.
[Guest 2]: Like, we just don't know how the next pandemic will hit people.
[Guest 2]: It's not going to be an equal distribution.
[Amit Varma]: So some of it is just luck.
[Amit Varma]: The next thing could be a virus that makes economists stupid.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, wait, we already have that.
[Amit Varma]: There's politics.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, shall we, shall we move on to your final lesson now?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, you know, I've been thinking about this a lot.
[Guest 2]: So of course, once again, like as an economist, especially public choice trained economist,
[Guest 2]: I'm constantly thinking about market failure and government failure, right?
[Guest 2]: And the classic public choice lesson is that we focus in neoclassical too much on market
[Guest 2]: failure.
[Guest 2]: And the solutions we give to counter market failure are typically rife with government
[Guest 2]: failure, right?
[Guest 2]: So once we take the political incentives into account, then we realize that, you know, maybe
[Guest 2]: there are solutions to market failure and maybe government intervention is not the best
[Guest 2]: way to go.
[Guest 2]: So this is the the Cliff Notes version of, you know, so much of public choice economics.
[Guest 2]: And I've been thinking about it.
[Guest 2]: And I have frankly been surprised by the amount of, you know, sort of like private voluntary
[Guest 2]: action by private citizens and their failures, right?
[Guest 2]: And I've been trying to put this in perspective in one sense.
[Guest 2]: So the state has, of course, failed spectacularly.
[Guest 2]: We've talked about it for almost two hours on the margins on which the state has failed
[Guest 2]: spectacularly.
[Guest 2]: But I don't see 10 months into the pandemic, private individuals, civil society groups
[Guest 2]: doing that much better.
[Guest 2]: You know, I don't see private movements for wearing masks or getting tested or movements
[Guest 2]: to speed up testing.
[Guest 2]: I don't even see private movements to say, hey, this is how we can make Christmas better
[Guest 2]: without getting in a room with each other, right, or make Thanksgiving better.
[Guest 2]: I don't see any movements among young people saying, hey, we are not going to be so affected
[Guest 2]: by this, but maybe we should say grandma or whatever, like, you know, where am I?
[Guest 2]: So I live in a fairly urban area.
[Guest 2]: And when I walk past, you know, when I'm walking the dogs, every single sports bar is completely
[Guest 2]: packed full, right, on evenings and on weekends.
[Guest 2]: Those sorts of things genuinely surprised me.
[Guest 2]: I thought it might have been OK initially.
[Guest 2]: Ten months into the pandemic, at 3000 plus deaths per day, it's pretty shocking that
[Guest 2]: people are behaving like this.
[Guest 2]: And I've been trying to think why this is the case, right?
[Guest 2]: And this is, I think, going back to the Adam Smith lesson, right?
[Guest 2]: The entire goal for us in society is to find institutions that will align self-interest
[Guest 2]: with social interest, right?
[Guest 2]: So of course, people don't want to sacrifice and they're, you know, if you're 20 something
[Guest 2]: and you're not going to be that severely affected, of course, you want to go out and you want
[Guest 2]: to be with your friends and you want to have Christmas, all of the usual things.
[Guest 2]: But what could have, you know, changed that?
[Guest 2]: What could have aligned that better?
[Guest 2]: And I think that's mass rapid testing, right?
[Guest 2]: If we had gotten our testing act together in March and April and just gone whole hog,
[Guest 2]: built up testing capacity, approved all kinds of different tests, you know, and and just
[Guest 2]: encouraged people to test frequently, test all the time, return tests quickly and get
[Guest 2]: back to society, we would have had some remarkably different outcomes.
[Guest 2]: Because I, you know, 20 somethings are self-interested, but they're not like serial killers, right?
[Guest 2]: I mean, they're not good.
[Guest 2]: Most, I mean, America is very pro-social, at least my experience with Americans.
[Guest 2]: They're very pro-social.
[Guest 2]: They're very engaged in civil society.
[Guest 2]: There's high level of trust.
[Guest 2]: You know, people are not going to fake their COVID tests and go and infect a whole bunch
[Guest 2]: of people just to watch their favorite football game or something.
[Guest 2]: People tend to be responsible.
[Guest 2]: And the big problem was that we did not inform them about their own situation and how much
[Guest 2]: risk they might cause.
[Guest 2]: And we imposed all sorts of bizarre costs on them, whether or not they can infect other
[Guest 2]: people.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: And that's sort of like the worst combination in terms of aligning, you know, self and social
[Guest 2]: interest.
[Guest 2]: So I think the failure or like, you know, what we would traditionally call like an externality
[Guest 2]: kind of failure, which has happened in COVID, I think that's just because, to my mind, that's
[Guest 2]: because of testing.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: And 10 months in, it still takes three days to get your test back.
[Guest 2]: We know right now there's a lot of holiday travel over Christmas.
[Guest 2]: Most people who need to take an airline, you know, they need to show a negative COVID test
[Guest 2]: in the last 72 hours or 96 hours or whatever the airline rules are.
[Guest 2]: It takes three days to get your test back.
[Guest 2]: Even now, they're not giving us test results on weekends in many of the labs.
[Guest 2]: I mean, 10 months in, this is just shocking in a country as well resourced and as rich
[Guest 2]: as America.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: Given the cost of the pandemic, so many people would have been willing to spend a fair bit
[Guest 2]: of money frequently to keep getting tested so that they could engage in all the activities
[Guest 2]: that they wanted to.
[Guest 2]: So I think that has been the big lesson for me.
[Guest 2]: And I think this is an important lesson even going forward.
[Guest 2]: So my sense in the early, when I when I supported the original version of the Indian lockdown,
[Guest 2]: right, which was just supposed to be three weeks, it was supposed to flatten the curve
[Guest 2]: and, you know, ramp up testing capacity.
[Guest 2]: We never ramped up testing capacity that much in India.
[Guest 2]: I mean, we did.
[Guest 2]: It is better than it was before, but never enough to actually, you know, deal with the
[Guest 2]: pandemic, neither in India nor in the United States.
[Guest 2]: And the second thing about that was just, and here I come to the government failure
[Guest 2]: and maybe even social failure, which is just the drift, right?
[Guest 2]: We were all talking about testing capacity in March and April.
[Guest 2]: Nobody is talking about testing capacity except like Paul Romer right now, right?
[Guest 2]: Everyone has forgotten, everyone has moved on.
[Guest 2]: Then it became shelter in place and lockdowns and masks and Trump elections.
[Guest 2]: Now it is vaccine and who gets the vaccine first and how unfair that is.
[Guest 2]: We never really solved the original problem and no one pointed out the failure in that
[Guest 2]: original.
[Guest 2]: So I think just information, you know, it would have really aligned self and social
[Guest 2]: interest.
[Guest 2]: And we failed globally in that in a big way, other than places like South Korea and Vietnam
[Guest 2]: and you know, those are the countries.
[Guest 2]: If you look at the success stories, they all did very, you know, they really ramped up
[Guest 2]: testing capacity and their citizens behaved sensibly and their death numbers are very,
[Guest 2]: very low.
[Amit Varma]: Uh, so there is a lesson there.
[Amit Varma]: I'll both agree and disagree with you.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, uh, and the reason I'll both agree and disagree with you is that society contains
[Amit Varma]: multitudes to, uh, you know, invent a version of my old cliche and therefore people react
[Amit Varma]: in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: So yes, many people have been irresponsible and crowding the bars and the restaurants,
[Amit Varma]: but equally, what I have seen in India is that it is civil society that really stepped
[Amit Varma]: up when the state failed.
[Amit Varma]: For example, look at the migrant crisis that was just horrendous in Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: It is civil society groups who actually fed them in Bombay.
[Amit Varma]: It is in Mumbai.
[Amit Varma]: It is, you know, civil society, which, uh, you know, Sonu Sood organized all these buses
[Amit Varma]: to help them out.
[Amit Varma]: There's this wonderful organization called Khana Chahiye.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, you know, one of the founders is a friend of mine called Ruben Mascarenas
[Amit Varma]: and we've been talking about him coming on the show at some point and he got COVID himself
[Amit Varma]: once and thankfully recovered and is fine now.
[Amit Varma]: And what those guys literally fed hundreds of thousands of people in the streets of Bombay
[Amit Varma]: and that was civil society doing something you typically expect the state to do.
[Amit Varma]: So I would simply say here that, you know, that yes, it, you know, it wasn't perfect,
[Amit Varma]: but in many senses it was better than the state.
[Amit Varma]: And while, you know, state failure, government failure is ubiquitous, especially in India.
[Amit Varma]: I think market failure is, you know, occasional and temporary and, uh, you know, so it's a,
[Amit Varma]: so let's not give civil society a bad rap.
[Guest 2]: No, I'm not giving civil society a bad rap on everything.
[Guest 2]: Of course they do wonderful things.
[Guest 2]: I mean, even in the United States, there are church groups that actually, you know, they
[Guest 2]: were sewing masks and giving to people.
[Guest 2]: That's not what I meant at all.
[Guest 2]: I meant civil society has not had a good solution to this limited point of the externality aspect
[Guest 2]: of COVID.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: And we don't see that element being solved by, you know, voluntary action.
[Guest 2]: Of course, civil society does wonderful things.
[Guest 2]: I mean, how else would we solve half the government problems in most places in the world?
[Guest 1]: I do think they've underperformed relative to expectations.
[Guest 1]: Uh, again, in the United States, I think about, you know, who is overperformed and it's the
[Guest 1]: NBA, right.
[Guest 1]: And like some of the universities, University of Illinois, University of Virginia, what
[Guest 1]: you see, well, you know, and, and it is because of, of testing, you know, they ramped up testing
[Guest 1]: and kept their people safe.
[Guest 1]: But there are not many, you know, fast grants, my colleague Tyler Cowen.
[Guest 1]: But there are not many institutions which have, uh, overperformed in this crisis.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So Alex, let's move on now to your fifth and final lesson, though, of course we, I'm sure
[Amit Varma]: we have unlimited lessons, but your fifth and final lesson for this episode.
[Guest 1]: So my fifth and final lesson is that I'm more worried about viruses than before.
[Guest 1]: Now you might think, well, that's bloody obvious, isn't it, Alex?
[Guest 1]: But I want to talk about computer viruses.
[Guest 1]: Okay.
[Guest 1]: So the next crisis, the next pandemic, I worry that our computer systems will go down and
[Guest 1]: we'll all be forced to go outside and interact with people again, you know, we'll all be
[Guest 1]: forced to go, oh no, I got to spend more time with my family, you know, now I've been kicked
[Guest 1]: off the internet.
[Guest 1]: But yeah, it does, I mean, you know, viruses do share some similarities, computer viruses
[Guest 1]: and people viruses, you know, the robots could be infected with the virus.
[Guest 1]: We've seen, you know, we're being hacked by the Russians or perhaps by the Chinese, depending
[Guest 1]: upon who you believe.
[Guest 1]: But so much our systems, including our nuclear power, our electric grid, are under the control
[Guest 1]: of computers and artificial intelligences, our financial system.
[Guest 1]: Most of the trades on Wall Street now are done by AIs, okay?
[Guest 1]: Most of the trades are not by human beings, they're by AIs.
[Guest 1]: And so creating vaccines for computers and insulating some computers from the internet,
[Guest 1]: all of this seems much more important.
[Guest 1]: Partly this goes back to the tail risks that we were talking about earlier.
[Guest 1]: So one of the risks is from, you know, solar storms and things like that, natural risks,
[Guest 1]: things like that, which can in fact are, which could bring down our computer systems and
[Guest 1]: our electrical grid.
[Guest 1]: And malicious actors are another one.
[Guest 1]: And I don't think we have seen, you know, the big one, we haven't had the big one.
[Guest 1]: And the big one is coming, you know, even just shutting down the internet, you know,
[Guest 1]: for a few hours, you know, Gmail and, you know, something like that, which has occasionally
[Guest 1]: happened.
[Guest 1]: That's a big hiccup, you know, that's a big cost to GDP and so forth.
[Guest 1]: And I don't think we've seen the big one and so much of this technology is becoming decentralized.
[Guest 1]: So it doesn't take a state actor even to make some deadly computer viruses or even some,
[Guest 1]: you know, biological viruses, non-state actors, even high school kids can create a virus nowadays,
[Guest 1]: both biological and computer.
[Guest 1]: So I think my, the weight that I now put on, the value that I now put on, you know, Norton
[Guest 1]: antivirus, but more generally on, also on the U.S.
[Guest 1]: The U.S. has a anti-hacking, anti-viral system, which tries to keep control of our electric
[Guest 1]: grid and so forth.
[Guest 1]: And I just think we need to be investing much more.
[Guest 1]: And we need to do it, obviously, before the big one happens.
[Guest 1]: Let's try not to be caught this time, okay?
[Guest 1]: You know, this should be like a big warning bell, okay?
[Guest 1]: Like how obvious does it have to be that a virus is bad?
[Guest 1]: Okay.
[Guest 1]: Now let's just change that.
[Guest 1]: Oh, a computer virus.
[Guest 1]: Okay.
[Guest 1]: So we've been given the warning.
[Guest 1]: Nobody can say that we were not warned.
[Guest 1]: We were warned.
[Guest 1]: And of course, we were warned about the biological virus too, many, many times.
[Guest 1]: But now we're being warned about computer viruses, and I think we ought to pay attention.
[Amit Varma]: You heard it here first from Alex Stabadour.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and it strikes me that if such a virus does strike us, and everyone in India
[Amit Varma]: loses the internet for a day or two, we might finally begin to empathize with the people
[Amit Varma]: of Kashmir, because that's exactly what has been done to them.
[Amit Varma]: They haven't had the internet for a year.
[Amit Varma]: And I think most of us just take it so much for granted.
[Amit Varma]: Like 30 years ago, the internet would have seemed absolute freaking magic.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we are stunted without it in all the things that we do and the ways we communicate,
[Amit Varma]: and even the ways we find comfort and solace sometimes.
[Amit Varma]: So, so yeah, maybe, maybe, maybe we deserve that.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just being facetious here.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, so here's the thing, right?
[Guest 2]: I mean, when we say that we've been warned, right, of course, we've been warned.
[Guest 2]: And we were also warned about this pandemic.
[Guest 2]: And of course, I mean, my granddad is 104, and he survived the Spanish flu.
[Guest 2]: So we also have like living life examples of being warned in one sense.
[Guest 2]: I don't think they'll pay attention precisely for the reasons we talked about at the head
[Guest 2]: of the conversation, which is stale risk, right?
[Guest 2]: I don't think I mean, we have a better chance of Microsoft killing the hackers or holding
[Guest 2]: them at bay, as we saw just in the last two days, then we have at, you know, some kind
[Guest 2]: of concerted global action to make sure these sorts of things don't happen.
[Guest 2]: So I have very little faith that they are listening, you know, so I think the best thing
[Guest 2]: we could probably get out of this is maybe some really smart people who are all sitting
[Guest 2]: in different parts of the world are alerted to this and start working with each other
[Guest 2]: in a decentralized way, the way we saw with the vaccine sequencing, you know, something
[Guest 2]: like that.
[Guest 2]: But I don't, you know, really believe that people are going to pay when I say people,
[Guest 2]: I mean, those in power will pay attention to this, you know, unless it's a military
[Guest 2]: problem in the United States government, people don't pay attention to tail risks, right?
[Guest 2]: So if we can convert this and say, you know, hacking a computer virus is like a nuclear
[Guest 2]: attack because they can hack into your nuclear prowess, then maybe they will they will pay
[Guest 2]: attention to this.
[Guest 2]: But other than that, you know, it's it's pretty sad.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And in the case of something like this one, when you say we have been warned, we are actually
[Guest 2]: warned of so many.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no one there are economists who predicted seven of the last two recessions, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so it's what what warning do you even take seriously?
[Amit Varma]: And even if you think intellectually that, yeah, this is a problem, you're good.
[Amit Varma]: The free rider effect kicks in, you'll wait for someone else to do something to solve
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: And you're like, what can I do?
[Amit Varma]: We'll kind of as we are coming close to running out of time, we'll move on to my fifth and
[Amit Varma]: final lesson, which is kind of more about the human condition in the sense that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Alex just joked about how if the internet goes, we'll actually have to talk to real
[Amit Varma]: people again and spend time with the family.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that in 2020, that's literally what happened because people weren't going
[Amit Varma]: to work.
[Amit Varma]: You know, families were forced to sort of stick together for long periods of time.
[Amit Varma]: And what this does is it kind of reveals the real way in which people relate to each other.
[Amit Varma]: Like I think in a lot of interpersonal relationships, there is this slight delusional aspect of
[Amit Varma]: what it is as a kind of inertia, which keeps it going.
[Amit Varma]: And what we have seen during the pandemic is that, you know, incidents of domestic violence
[Amit Varma]: have gone up.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I think someone in England was making an argument that the reason there
[Amit Varma]: should be no lockdown is all the kids who are being killed by abusive parents.
[Amit Varma]: You're counting those lives.
[Amit Varma]: So those are, again, kind of unseen effects.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that there's been this, perhaps this increased scrutiny.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't know how many people are introspective about this on personal relationships and what
[Amit Varma]: they mean.
[Amit Varma]: Like one of the things that I sometimes think about is, you know, Gant's warning about not
[Amit Varma]: using people as a means to an end, but as an end in themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And I wonder how many of us do that in our personal lives, where everyone is a character
[Amit Varma]: in a drama where we have the lead role, and they're just means to an end in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, we will rationalize it and, you know, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But I wonder how much of the, you know, that facade would have broken down in this period
[Amit Varma]: of people, you know, forced to kind of be together.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I know at a personal level, all three of us obviously very lucky in this regard.
[Amit Varma]: But many people aren't and many people don't have a choice.
[Amit Varma]: And it also strikes me that, you know, again, at an intellectual level, and I don't want
[Amit Varma]: to get too philosophical about this, but all of us wear a mask or a variety of masks.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes as you know, Vinay Sitapati pointed out in a recent episode in the context
[Amit Varma]: of the BJP, that if you wear a mask long enough, the mask becomes a face, which clearly hasn't
[Amit Varma]: happened with the BJP, which wore the Vajpayee mask for a while.
[Amit Varma]: But it strikes me that when the mask doesn't become the face that it can sort of melt away
[Amit Varma]: under scrutiny.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and I'm not being very articulate about this, but I think what lockdown did
[Amit Varma]: was that it forced people to actually, you know, be in forced proximity with each other
[Amit Varma]: for long periods of time, where you could no longer, you know, warehouse your family
[Amit Varma]: away, but you actually had to deal with them on a daily basis and perhaps deal with yourself
[Amit Varma]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: So sort of an abstract point, I don't really know what the lesson in this is.
[Amit Varma]: But I think this is one of the possible consequences of, you know, all the stuff that's gone down
[Amit Varma]: this year.
[Guest 2]: I'll point out the contra to this.
[Guest 2]: I was talking to Alex about this the other day.
[Guest 2]: So one of the things I realized during the lockdown that has probably shaped me the most
[Guest 2]: in a way that I hadn't figured out before is that I'm an immigrant, right?
[Guest 2]: And that means that I don't live in the country where I was born, it's a small minority of
[Guest 2]: people in the world.
[Guest 2]: My parents live very far away, everyone I grew up with lives very far away.
[Guest 2]: Over the last, say, 10 or 15 years, I have been very lucky in that my closest friends
[Guest 2]: are not the people I see every day, right?
[Guest 2]: So I've already coped to pandemic life over 12 years, in a sense, that all my closest
[Guest 2]: friends are only reachable by Zoom, I have been wishing them on their birthday and toasting
[Guest 2]: champagne at different time zones and things like that.
[Guest 2]: So this has been my life for a very long time.
[Guest 2]: So that part doesn't feel different, right?
[Guest 2]: But the part that does feel that that's very stark is there was this comfort that you can
[Guest 2]: always reach people that you need to reach in a happy moment or an emergency or whatever.
[Guest 2]: And that has been taken away from me during the pandemic.
[Guest 2]: And that makes suddenly being far away and being an immigrant quite difficult in a way
[Guest 2]: that it wasn't before.
[Guest 2]: So I've had very close friends lose their parents, and I cannot give them a hug, right?
[Guest 2]: Something that I would have just immediately traveled to see them at a funeral or a memorial,
[Guest 2]: right?
[Guest 2]: I can't, if anything happens to my parents or my granddad, who's quite old, right?
[Guest 2]: Close friends.
[Guest 2]: I can't quickly travel to India if I can travel at all, given all the COVID restrictions.
[Guest 2]: So I always spent a lot of time far away from the world I grew up in, in the comfort that
[Guest 2]: I can access it anytime I want.
[Guest 2]: It's just a matter of throwing money at the problem.
[Guest 2]: And now that is not so true anymore.
[Guest 2]: So I've both had a lot of training for this moment.
[Guest 2]: But all my safety nets and backups have collapsed during COVID.
[Guest 2]: So that makes this very difficult.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, another flip side of it is that perhaps we stop taking friendships and relationships
[Amit Varma]: for granted.
[Amit Varma]: We appreciate it a little more.
[Amit Varma]: Like I was certainly thinking the other day that has been so long since I got together
[Amit Varma]: with you know, many of my friends in the flesh.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, maybe that's one good thing that comes out of it, that we have a heightened
[Amit Varma]: appreciation of all the actual person to person relationships we are blessed with.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, I used a redundant phrase there, because what is a relationship, but person
[Amit Varma]: to person?
[Guest 2]: Hey, dogs, please, the most important relationships in my life, aside from my immediate family
[Guest 2]: are my dogs.
[Guest 2]: They're actually what got me through the pandemic.
[Guest 2]: They are the happiest things in the world.
[Guest 2]: They live in the moment, which is exactly the lesson we all need.
[Guest 2]: Alex has dogs, but he's not quite obsessed with his dogs as I am with mine.
[Guest 2]: But they're joyous, right?
[Guest 2]: They brighten your day.
[Guest 2]: They're so happy to see you.
[Guest 2]: They are so happy you're trapped at home, 24 seven, and you will never ever leave.
[Guest 1]: Like they're like, this is amazing.
[Guest 1]: And by the way, the price of puppies has gone way up.
[Guest 1]: Yes.
[Guest 1]: So I'm going to be an economist and tell you the price.
[Guest 2]: No, it's true.
[Guest 2]: So we thought we would, you know, get one of the rescue shelter puppies and be like,
[Guest 2]: you know, do gooders or whatever.
[Guest 2]: We were on the waitlist for four months, and then we finally got a puppy from the same
[Guest 2]: family we got our first dog from and actually paid like cash for him.
[Guest 2]: But so I disagree that relationships are person to person.
[Amit Varma]: I think one of the nicest lessons that has emerged from this is the one from your dogs
[Amit Varma]: live in the moment, which is indeed a beautiful lesson.
[Amit Varma]: Take happiness in the small things.
[Amit Varma]: Nobody throws a ball out of love.
[Amit Varma]: Go and fetch it.
[Amit Varma]: And on that note, you know, thanks so much, Shruti and Alex, for coming on this show.
[Amit Varma]: This has been a delightful conversation.
[Guest 2]: Thanks, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: It's always lovely to speak with you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, you can follow us on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti is at S Raj Gopalan, Alex is at A Tabarrok, and I am at Amit Verma, A M I T V A R M A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at SeenUnseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening and hey, have a great 2021.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.